---
title: "Bridge Pedal 2024"
date: 2024-08-11
categories: blog
tags:
- cycling
- family
---

One of my long-standing goals is to get more of my family biking. Amber's had
some back issues when trying to cycle before, though, so it mostly falls to the
kiddos to try and fulfill those dreams.

The [Providence Bridge Pedal](https://www.providence.org/lp/bridge-pedal) seemed
like a natural outing to try on for size. Part of that was the relatively short
distance -- less than twenty on paper, and spoiler alert [we ended up doing about
eleven](https://www.strava.com/activities/12122441570). Another part was the
view from the top and the chance to ride on full freeways that are normally car
only.

{% include image.html
    caption="Family starting off on the Bridge Pedal"
    url="/images/BridgePedal-2024-Together.jpg"
%}

Across the summer I did get out and bike with the kids some in preparation.
Evidently I needed to do more, though, as they struggled quite a bit with the
long climbs up Portland's various bridges. While my son's energy levels can't be
denied, they apparently don't translate directly to leg strength.

{% include image.html
    caption="Climbing the bridges is no joke!"
    url="/images/BridgePedal-2024-UpTheHill.jpg"
%}

We ended up taking a pause and my daughter's knee (which she's ended up having
surgery on since) bothered her enough for a pickup there. I managed to convince
my son to finish through as only one bridge remained, and we did get there in
style. Popsicles at the end sweetened the deal, even if it meant standing in
some crowds.

My dream of doing some long rides isn't forsaken entirely, though as both kids
are entering their teenage years I'm aware that I have a limited window yet to
get them engaged. We'll see how next year goes, and I'll start a little sooner
training next time around.
