---
title: "Flattening Barcelona"
date: "2018-08-22"
categories: travel
tags:
- spain
- flat
---

While I've traveled many places before, I've never had to figure out how to rent
a place to live.

## Research

The first step began months ago. Since almost the moment we decided to relocate,
Amber started cruising real estate sites for Barcelona. In particular, she spent
hours on [idealista](https://www.idealista.com/). Coworkers confirmed that as a
top site on the topic, and as time approached Amber favorited dozens of flats to
consider.

During our first weeks in country we took the next step of [exploring
neighborhoods](https://travel.jasonrclark.com/exploring-barcelona/). That
confirmed our initial list of target areas: Gràcia, Poblenou, or Eixample. Each
had different things to recommend it. Gràcia had narrow streets and old-world
charm. Poblenou had relative quiet within walking distance of beaches. Eixample
had the bustling urban heart of the city.

Next we finalized our need vs want list. We wanted three or four bedrooms so the
kids each got their own space, and ideally we could support visitors (hint hint,
come visit!) Multiple bathrooms, outdoor space, pool (?!), washing machine,
laundry all fell on the nice to haves.

The biggest change to reckon with, though, was our very American notions of
space. Obviously we were downsizing... but how much? We got pretty good at
translating meters squared into square feet, and with some uncertainty capped
the lower bound of our search at 90 m2 (about 970 ft2). This left us feeling by
turns absurdly American and nervous at the transition we might find ourselves
making.

## Visiting

Idealista lets you contact the flat owners straight from the website, so we shot
off messages to a handful of our favorites. Here we encountered the difficulty
of Spain in high season... much of the country is on holiday for weeks at a time
during July and August. I'm convinced that a different time of year we might
have heard from more of them, but we ended up getting four bites.

This revealed a big difference between renting in the US and Barcelona.
Everything on idealista ran through real estate agencies. Back home I would have
expected to directly contact apartment owners, or at least someone whoever
managed the place. Instead, every time we were talking to a real estate agent.
Apparently with effort you can avoid this--and the agency fees that come along,
which are more than a month's rent!--but with our timelines and inexperience, we
just rolled with the agents.

We ended up seeing three places near Eixample and Gracia, and one in El
Poblenou. The flats in Eixample were largely along [Avinguda
Diagonal](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Avinguda_Diagonal), a large busy street,
but all were surprisingly quiet behind closed doors and windows. These were
close to my work, and two of the three had excellent space and layout. The parks
nearby were lovely, and Amber loved the architecture nearby.

Despite all this, the flat in El Poblenou drew us continually back. It's
highlight feature was unique, and unlikely to show up for us wherever we move in
the future--Mediterranean surf and sand just a short walk away. It's also a
quieter neighborhood, with a nice little Rambla full of shops and restaurants.
Just the vibe we were after.

{% include image.html caption="Rambla del Poblenou" url="/images/travel/flattening-rambla.jpg" %}

## Signing

Having chosen the place, we visited a real estate office to sign papers that we
intended to rent through their agency. At this point we paid the agency fee,
although the agreement clearly stated if the rental didn't happen it would be
refunded. At this point after two weeks in a single hostel room with the kids,
my attitude toward shelling out money to get into a place was roughly like this:

{% include image.html caption="Take my money" url="/images/travel/flattening-take-my-money.jpg" %}

That commitment in place, our agent contacted another agent (really)
representing the owners. Between them, they sorted out the details. The only
mild hiccup was a type of insurance the owners wanted which our work status
presented some issues for. After a little negotiating we found a way to settle
that to everyone's satisfaction.

A few days later, we had yet another round of signing at a different real estate
office. Although the stack of papers was nowhere near the mountain of paperwork
for buying a house, I did feel déjà vu signing page after page. Beyond the
contract, we even signed pictures of the various meters with the understanding
we could confirm the values once we moved in.

Papers signed, the keys were ours!

{% include image.html caption="The keys are ours!" url="/images/travel/flattening-keys.jpg" %}

## Moving In

The owners weren't present as they live in Germany, but their father, a friendly
man named Antonio, joined for the signing. Afterward, he took us to the flat and
showed us the place in more detail. He gave us a great tour of the various
systems--locks, windows, AC, bunk beds--with the knowledge of someone who had
really been around the place. He even introduced us to [Dino's
Gelato](http://www.gelatsdino.com/) just a block down the Rambla. Danger!

After Antonio left, the day presented one more task... moving in as best we
could. Eight maximized checked bags and four sizable carry-ons were still stowed
at the hostel. The kids' room had a bunk bed, but Amber and I had nowhere to
sleep. While we'd have liked nothing better than to just stay put for the night,
instead we journeyed out, drawn to that place we'd spend so much time over the
coming weeks:
[IKEA](https://twitter.com/jasonrclark/status/1025336050770739200).

We purchased a queen mattress and a rather large pile of other items with which
to start our new home. It was almost 10PM when we got out, with nary a taxi to
be seen. I honestly doubt most taxis could have accommodated all our stuff.
Fortunately, at the front of IKEA there are almost always unbranded vans with
men hanging around, ready to help you haul. That evening there was only one, and
he didn't have room for the whole family. We finally got a taxi, and the family
headed home while I set off for the hostel after loading everything from IKEA
into the back.

The night was hot, continuing the smothering heatwave that we'd run smack into
when we landed in Barcelona. The van didn't have AC, and I sat with sweat
pouring down me as we wove through the darkened night toward the hostel.

Our friends at the front desk at [Twentytú](https://twentytu.com/) graciously
helped to ferry the gargantuan mass of luggage to the van. This saved time, and
calmed my paranoid (?) concerns about the van suddenly vanishing with all our
worldly possessions while I was inside locating that one last bag.

Another broiling hop in the van, and then we shuttled all the stuff into the
entryway of the build. Hilariously, the driver mirrored my nerves, but about
everyone else around us as we unloaded.

By the time I hoisted the entire world upstairs, my clothes were soaked through,
and I was ready to collapse. We sliced open the plastic wrapping on the
mattress, flopped it on the floor, took a quick cold shower, and then collapsed
into a deep, contented sleep.

(Wondering what the flat's like? Don't worry... a tour will be forthcoming soon!)
