---
title: "Heat"
date: "2018-09-23"
categories: travel
tags:
- spain
- weather
---

As lifelong Oregonians, weather was among the larger changes we expected moving
to Barcelona. But we didn't expect to land in the middle of a heat wave.

We arrived during July 2018, with record temperatures popping up all over
Europe. Many of my coworkers confirmed--this was abnormally hot, even by their
standards. In Barcelona this meant every day exceeded 90F/32C, often by quite a
bit. Oregon summers hit those heights; in fact, during those first weeks,
Portland often had a higher max temperature. But that comparison excludes a
crucial factor: humidity. Nestled on the lovely Mediterranean Sea, Barcelona's
humidity hung anywhere from 75-90% day in and day out, remorseless and thick.
You could practically swim in that air, though not a swim that would refresh
you.

Our first two weeks were in a hostel where, thankfully the room and common areas
had some air conditioning. The hallways between were left as a broiling
challenge, though, the moment you left your door. The front lobby was extra
chilly, and I was often willing to run errands if they afforded the chance to
pass through that frigid air.

Space in the shared fridge was tiny, but we sacrificed a chunk to a big jug of
cool water since the taps provided little relief on their own. We would often
treat ourselves by ducking out to the big grocery store 10 minutes walk away for
a bag of ice. Hurrying home, we'd paint the pavement with sweat and melt-off
from the ice almost the whole way. Once back, we'd stuff every water bottle we
owned with what remained frozen and rejoice.

A key tactic for dealing with heat is simple avoidance--don't go out unless you
have to. Unfortunately in those early weeks that wasn't an option. We had to
explore neighborhoods, visit flats, and purchase necessities from stores often
long distances from Poblenou. These activities rarely happened in the early
morning, so it wasn't uncommon to set out on a mission in the heat of the day.
Needless to say, our energy for completing all those tasks wasn't what it could
have been in a cooler period.

There's a particular feel to that humid air, a speed with which your shirt
starts sticking and your forehead moistens. I haven't felt anything like it
since Mali, and there at least rain every couple of days broke the humidity a
bit. I started commuting to the office while the heat persisted, and descending
into the Metro proved particularly stifling. Each step you could feel the heat
climb a degree, while the air closed around you like an unwelcomely warm
blanket. Blessedly, the subway cars had air conditioning, a small relief to
anticipate, quickly chilling all that sweat you'd accumulated on the walk and
wait to the station.

The beach (which we'll discuss more later) also provided respite. The water was
perfect for swimming on these blazing days, just cold enough with no threat of
frozen limbs as on the Oregon coast. We trekked out to the beaches every few
days, risking sunburns to bob in the soothing water.

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet" data-lang="en"><p dir="ltr" lang="en">Well this doesn’t suck <a href="https://t.co/6l6yzihxoA">pic.twitter.com/6l6yzihxoA</a></p>— YAML Clark (@jasonrclark) <a href="https://twitter.com/jasonrclark/status/1022118210093633542?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">July 25, 2018</a></blockquote>
<script async src="https://platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script>

Our flat also has two air conditioners, which proved perfect for keeping things
under control. We've continued cooling water and introduced a Brita filter in
the process. There's always a refreshing drink to be had in the fridge.

And worst come to worst, if you're willing to break away for a couple minutes
down the rambla, [there's always gelato to soothe your fevered
head](http://www.gelatsdino.com/en).

PS. Hilariously, since we've returned to the US for a month to finish our visas,
Amber has found herself _freezing all the time_. Admittedly, San Fransisco was a
bit cooler than Portland, but I didn't expect that the tables would turn in just
six weeks. I'm ready to return and see what October in Barcelona looks like.

PPS.

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet" data-lang="en"><p dir="ltr" lang="en">My local weather app for Barcelona has a specific button for finding out how it is at the beach <a href="https://twitter.com/hashtag/winning?src=hash&amp;ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">#winning</a> <a href="https://t.co/u8OY4NO7Hc">pic.twitter.com/u8OY4NO7Hc</a></p>— YAML Clark (@jasonrclark) <a href="https://twitter.com/jasonrclark/status/1030449781188042752?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">August 17, 2018</a></blockquote>
<script async src="https://platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script>
