---
title: "Eating in Barcelona: Part I"
date: "2018-07-31"
categories: travel
tags:
- spain
- eats
- explorations
---

Being the family that we are, we've all been looking forward to the food in
Barcelona. I mean, Cora asked for salami and green olives for her second
birthday party. This part of the world aligns very well with our family palette.

{% include image.html caption="Almuerzo a Enrique Tomas" url="/images/travel/eating-enrique-tomas.jpg" %}

## [Enrique Tomás de Glòries](https://www.glories.com/restaurant/EnriqueToms)

We reached Barcelona in the middle of the day and immediately we didn't have a
US->European power adapter for
Amber's [CPAP](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Continuous_positive_airway_pressure).
Oops! Fortunately, a shopping mall, [Glòries](https://www.glories.com/), was in
walking distance of the hostel. So our first expedition was a Spanish mall. 😂 A
mall is a mall, and although plenty of the brands were unfamiliar, it gave the
whole family a sense of familiarity.

Why is this in a blog about food in Barcelona, you might ask?

The lower level houses a space called [El
Mercat](https://www.glories.com/elmercat). It's filled with small shops and
stalls with higher-end food products. We stopped at [Enrique
Tomás](https://www.glories.com/restaurant/EnriqueToms) for jamón, chorizo,
olives, and lemon Fanta (which the children are obsessing over). It hit the spot
and covered it in salty, cured goodness.

## [ARTEspañol](https://artespanol.com/)

Friday we viewed our first flat on [Avinguda
Diagonal](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Avinguda_Diagonal) (more on flat hunting
in Barcelona soon.... you know, once we've found one!) Obviously the effort left
us hungry, and in the whole week we hadn't yet sampled that Spanish mainstay:
paella.

A quick search nearby turned up [ARTEspañol](https://artespanol.com/). I don't
know whether it's particularly authentic--felt a little touristy, lots of bull
fighting decor--but wow was it the meal we needed at that moment.

They had kid-sized paellas with chicken that after minor prompting the children
inhaled. Amber and I split a larger paella with chorizo and pork ribs. The
richness of the rice, that lovely crispness. Yum.

I look forward to trying a seafood option next time. I've also had the Valencia
(rabbit, snail, and chicken) recommended by my cousin Hannah. Clearly, there's
more paella in our future, and the future is bright!

## Shaka & Shack

I've heard lunch is often the big meal of the day here, and that's been working
well for the family in the July heat. Thursday we set out to visit New Relic's
office in Eixample, but first we needed lunch. Along the way to the Metro we'd
spotted a restaurant with signs reading "Burger Bar."

Personally I've found hamburgers to be a hit or miss when traveling in Europe.
By the same token, much of that experience was a couple decades ago (eek!) in
the UK. When Amber suggested we try lunch at this Burger Bar, I agreed with
reservations in my heart.

My concerns proved unfounded. The place, actually called Shaka & Shack, had nice
juicy burgers alongside small portions of thick fries. To my delight, mayo and
ketchup were both offered with these fries. Apparently Amber didn't know my deep
love for mayo and fries, probably from my time visiting Belgium. So good.

The staff was friendly and helpful. All around I'd go again, and given the
proximity to the hostel it seems very likely to happen.

Wonder when the cease and desist from a similarly named large burger chains in
the States is coming, or if this corner of Barcelona is distant enough to avoid
the litiginous corporate eye. 😰

## More to Come

This first week we've mostly explored with a focus on finding a flat. All the
walking, figuring out transit, etc. has stretched the family's energy. By the
time we need food, dining out or searching for cool places has been out of the
question. As we settle in more, expect more Eating in Barcelona reports!
