---
title: "Reaching Barcelona"
date: "2018-07-25"
categories: travel
tags:
- spain
- portland
- flying
- news
---

Well, after [that last post](/travel/2018/07/21/almost-packed/) you'd
have expected that we had things all locked up before we went to [our farewell
picnic on Saturday
night](/travel/2018/07/15/a-plan-emerges/).

Hahaha...

The picnic was a huge success. We saw people from many different aspects of our
life and shared food, memories, and hopes for the future with them. The event
drew quite a crowd, as you can see from this lovely group photo:

{% include image.html caption="Farewell picnic" url="/images/travel/reaching-picnic.jpg" %}

We left with huge warm feelings our hearts... and packing to do. Back at Anthony
and Kat's (our friends who graciously loaned up their basement since leaving the
house we'd been renting), we got the kids down and got to work on those last
couple loose ends. Our flight was early the next morning, so we planned to leave
at 4:30. Any guesses how much sleep we got?

Zero!

Yep, we worked the night through, stumbling and tired, but determined to get all
the things packed up and buttoned away.

Our beloved friend Kat got up with us in that dark morning hour and took us in
our van to the airport. (We'll be finally selling the van in September when
we're back around in Oregon while getting visas finalized). Tears and hugs were
shared, and then we were off to get luggage checked.

Did I mentioned we had a lot of luggage?

{% include image.html caption="Huge pile o' luggage" url="/images/travel/reaching-luggage.jpg" %}

Amber did a spectacular job of keeping the bags under weight, evenly spread, and
tightly packed. But moving your entire world still amounted to an impressive
pile. Thank goodness for curbside check-in at PDX!

TSA Pre also paid its way handily. Even with the kids in tow, we slid past
security with only one forgotten pocket knife to slow us down.

The first leg was a short hop to Oakland. By a miracle, we ended up in the first
row behind business class, which meant the under-seat space was larger than
average. Good thing, because our carry-ons pushed the limits of what many would
willfully lug down narrow plane aisles. Before we knew it we were landed in
Oakland, off the plane, and picking up our luggage.

Picking up luggage? Why couldn't they just check through? As you may have
gathered from [our earlier discussion on
plans](http://travel.jasonrclark.com/a-plan-emerges/), things have been
rather _fluid_ around when we'd actually leave. We'd bought cheap OAK -> BCN
tickets, but had been expecting/hoping to already be in San Fransisco getting
our visas issued. Hahaha, nice try. So at the last we bought tickets on [Alaska
Airlines](https://www.alaskaair.com/) to cover the PDX -> OAK leg. Did those end
up being on a shared airline that could check through? Nope! Thus we found
ourselves back in possession of the mountain of luggage in Oakland.

No problem, we'll just wheel over to the [Norwegian
Air](https://www.norwegian.com/) desk, check in most of it, and cruise on
through the all those services behind security, right? _Nope._ Turns out, the
front desk for Norwegian only opens 4 hours before their first flight... the 4pm
to Barcelona we were on. It was roughly 9AM, we we had hours to sit with our
train of luggage carts out where only one restaurant greeted us. We shuffled
bags around and made use of the time, but everyone was tired, hungry, and ready
to leave that airport by the time we actually checked in.

We were excited to have upgraded to the Premium Cabin on the long leg of this
flight. To get the flexible scheduling and baggage we needed, Premium was only a
few hundred dollars extra per person, so we splurged. Norwegian is a budget line
and the equipment was clearly second hand (from [Arik
Air](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arik_Air) apparently?) Many of the integrated
controls didn't work properly, the reclining seats clattered relentlessly when
in motion, and the crew handed out iPads for the in-flight entertainment as the
screens were mostly inoperable (3/4 of ours wouldn't respond to the remotes at
all). But, and it's a huge but, **the space was AMAZINGLY WORTH IT! I actually
slept 5-6 hours on a plane y'all!** That never happens, and sure helped smooth
the remainder of the day after landing Barcelona.

{% include image.html caption="Flying first class" url="/images/travel/reaching-first-class.jpg" %}

Since our flight left Oakland at 4pm, we ended up in Barcelona about noon.
Customs was a breeze, and we found ourselves grabbing a taxi in the heat of the
day to [the high-tech hostel](https://twentytu.com/) we're spending our first
couple weeks at while we hunt for a flat.

As it was the middle of the day we did a little exploring, but I'll save that
till next time and rest content that the Clarks have arrived in Barcelona!
