---
title: "A Plan Emerges"
date: "2018-07-15"
categories: travel
tags:
- spain
- news
---

Way back when we started this process, the immigration services New Relic
contracted with told us to expect the paperwork for residence + visa to take
about 30 business days. So earlier this summer, when the documentation was ready
for everything to kick off, we bought a cheap flight on [Norwegian
Air](https://www.norwegian.com/us/) for July 22, a good couple weeks past
that 30 day processing time. Smooth right?

Hahahahah-:gasp:-aahahahaha.

It turned out we needed to physically show up at the Spanish Consulate in San
Francisco to request the visa process start. That required an appointment, which
was backlogged almost two months beyond the "normal" timing the immigration
service was expecting. Our appointment date? September 4th.

This development left us in limbo. We'd unsuccessfully petitioned the consulate
for an earlier appointment since my visa was supposed to be fast-tracked, but as
June closed out, July departure was looking less and less likely.

Complicating that further, we needed to leave the house we were renting toward
the end of June. We had enough trips, family, and friend visits to pack out
until our July departure date. But "hanging" for all of August? :massive-sigh:

Our residence paperwork completed, so we had the necessary numbers to rent a
flat in Barcelona, open bank accounts, etc. A plan emerged. With those cheap
flights, it wouldn't be outrageous to take our July 22 flight out, then come
back in September to settle our visas. We can live in Spain for August as
visitors, get a flat, start sorting out the new shape of our life there, then
come back for the visa.

Apart from expense, the only other hang-up is around my eye condition and
insurance since I won't be working for New Relic Spain until the visa is
through. "Luckily," my eye is at a stable (if crummy) stage. We'd only see the
retinologist once during that month--a lot of wait and see--so I'm trying to
schedule with my referrals in Barcelona. At worst I'll  just postpone a couple
weeks to see the doctor stateside when we're back in September.

All this to say... it's T-minus one week until the Clarks leave for Barcelona
and our new adventure!
