---
title: "Exploring Barcelona"
date: "2018-07-28"
categories: travel
tags:
- spain
- explorations
---

The plan for the week was exploring various parts of Barcelona to prepare for
renting a flat. Overall it went well. We also learned a lot about our family
limits for tramping around in the unaccustomed heat!

## [TwentyTú](https://twentytu.com/)

That first afternoon we taxied to the hostel we're staying at,
[TwentyTú](https://twentytu.com/). This has proven an economical way to settle
for a couple weeks while we sort out the flat.

The staff has been super friendly and helpful. There's TV we can hook our new
Nintendo Switch up to, much to the children's joy. There's free WiFi, much to
the adults' joy. It's walking distance from a major shopping center, which has
proven key for obtaining the stuff we didn't pack. It's even a long walk from
some of the neighborhoods we wanted to visit, and a shorter walk to the Metro
(aka subway).

Nearby is the [Torre Glòries](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Torre_Gl%C3%B2ries)
(formerly Torre Agbar), a convenient landmark to navigate by. Cora calls it the
Tile Tower because although the picture doesn’t capture it, it’s quite colorful.

{% include image.html caption="Torre Glòries" url="/images/travel/exploring-torre.jpg" %}

On the walk to the store we found a cool playground space. Because of course,
what you need when on foot is a way to run around more.

{% include image.html caption="Playground near Torre Glòries" url="/images/travel/exploring-outdoor-gym.jpg" %}

The hostel has also let us start acclimating to a smaller space, since the room
is basically a hallway width in front of bunk beds ;)

## [Gràcia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gr%C3%A0cia)

Gràcia is a neighborhood north of the city center. We explored it on our first
full day out. It's got a lot of the classic feel of Barcelona, without as much
bustle and traffic as the city center.

A long walk through the neighborhood, and we could easily see ourselves living
there. The number of parks around impressed us. In particular we relaxed
in [Parc de les
Aigües](https://www.barcelona.cat/en/what-to-do-in-bcn/parks-and-gardens/parc-de-les-aigues_92086011955.html).
Not only did this have shade and multiple play structures for the kids, it also
sported green parrots chattering wherever we went!

{% include image.html caption="A green parrot in Parc de les Aigües" url="/images/travel/exploring-parrot.jpg" %}

We stopped for food along the way, some basic cured meats. It was there Asher
discovered he loves boquerones (anchovies) with vinegar. Really he just gobbles
them down! He’s not keen on his pictures being public, but there’s a great video
on Facebook if you want to befriend either of us.

As our first full day exploring, we overdid things significantly. The kids were
done by about 3/4 of the way through the 5 miles (8 km) of trooping.

## [El Poblenou](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/El_Poblenou)

The next neighborhood was El Poblenou, aka the _new village_. Further east of
the city center, it's out of comfortable walking distance of New Relic's office
in Eixample, but a quick Metro ride away. Learning our lesson from Gràcia, we
planned out a much shorter walk.

Poblenou definitely maintains the feeling of a smaller village in the big city.
We walked down the lovely [Rambla del
Poblenou](https://irbarcelona.org/barcelona-streets/rambla-poblenou/), a calmer
alternative to the larger Les Ramblas in central Barcelona. One flat we'd seen
online was right on the ramble, and it was easy to imagine ourselves living
there.

{% include image.html caption="Cora en la Rambla" url="/images/travel/exploring-rambla.jpg" %}

"That is hard work for me to hold it that long." - Coraline

El Poblenou's other big attraction is the beach. The Rambla runs right down to
the Mediterranean sand, a mere 5-10 minute walk.

{% include image.html caption="Beach by Poblenou" url="/images/travel/exploring-beach-tower.jpg" %}

The kids absolutely loved the beach. The water was cool, but comfortable to play
in for a long time. Such a change from the Oregon coast! It also afforded our
first major sunburn of the trip.

{% include image.html caption="Ouch!" url="/images/travel/exploring-sunburn.jpg" %}

## [Eixample](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eixample)

In the latter half of the week we dropped in at New Relic's Barcelona office to
say hello and check out the area right next door. Emerging from the Metro, Amber
immediately ooh-and-aah'd at the surroundings. This was all the charm,
architecture, and urban feel she'd been imagining in Barcelona.

This being our third neighborhood exploration, we tightened up the routine.
Basically we were sold already, so we just visited
[DelaCrem](http://www.delacrem.cat/), an exceptional gelato shop our friend
Aitor had recommended (heartily agreed!) The only question with Eixample is
whether finding the size and noise profile we want in the hub of the city.

{% include image.html caption="'Ew, tourists'" url="/images/travel/exploring-tourists.jpg" %}

Bussing from Eixample home proved a good plan. Although I find it less direct
than the Metro, it helps the kids engage more seeing the city versus cruising
through dark tunnels.

## Three Neighborhoods, No Answers Yet

This week has yielded a better feel for our new city. All the neighborhoods we
visited definitely met the criteria we're looking for... now to visit some flats
and actually find a place to live!

(Small administrative note... we've been using [Marco
Polo](https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/marco-polo-video-walkie-talkie/id912561374?mt=8)
to keep up asyncrhonously with friends. If you're on there (or want to be!) send
us a message. It's like Snapchat for families and grown-ups)
