---
title: "First Holidays Abroad: Christmas"
date: "2019-02-26"
categories: travel
tags:
- spain
- holiday
---

Since we arrived fully in Barcelona at the start of October, we chose not to
return to the United States for Christmas. It was a good choice for us, as
nobody was near ready to travel again so sooner after [our extended
visa-cation](/travel/2018/11/05/how-the-clarks-finally-got-their-spanish-visas).

November in Barcelona was rainy, but December dried up. It was about as cold as
the winter has gotten--plenty of days down around 7C/45F, but with the sun out,
still comfortable enough for wandering to parks and fighting with the children
about wearing a jacket. The cooler weather also excused us to spend a lot of the
holiday time finishing up the _Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild_ (one of the
best video games I've ever played) as a family (I drive, everyone else plays
copilot, which is getting harder and harder as the kids get more able to play
games themselves).

## Traditions

Travel lets you see the world through a different lens. I find that holidays
provide a particularly sharp opportunity to re-examine what's "normal."

In Spain a key difference around Christmas is that they have not one, but two
gift giving days. In times past, Christmas was more likely to be a religious and
family holiday, with gift giving centered instead around Three Kings Day, on
January 6th (more on that in a later post!)

We debated heavily whether to open presents on Christmas or Three Kings. In the
end, we went with Christmas simply to maximize the kids time-off from school
that they could use their new things. (We kept a fairly strict
one-thing-you-want, one-thing-you-need, one-thing-to-read policy given our small
space... we only failed it on the reading material ðŸ˜‚) The idea of keeping
Christmas more family focused, with another time to give presents, though, was
intriguing.

We invited a family from the kids' school over on the evening of Christmas Eve.
Back in the States our friends Faith and Aaron throw a yearly Christmas Eve
party that we try not to miss, and while this was far smaller in scale, we took
inspiration from them in having the cured meats, good cheeses, and _[sot
suppe](https://www.streetdirectory.com/travel_guide/3016/family/sot_suppe_norwegian_sweet_soup.html)_
[(Norwegian Sweet
Soup)](https://www.streetdirectory.com/travel_guide/3016/family/sot_suppe_norwegian_sweet_soup.html).

## The Tree

As November wound down, we bought what I still consider the perfect Christmas
tree:

{% include image.html caption="Doing something with lemons" url="/images/travel/lemon-christmas-tree.jpg" %}

We ended end up getting a more traditional artificial tree as well, but this
more eloquently expresses my feelings about life in Barcelona.

## TiÃ³ de Nadal

Catalonia is home to a truly unique Christmas tradition. I'd noticed on a work
trip to Barcelona the year before that there were lots of little logs with
smiley faces painted on them, especially in the Christmas markets. At the time I
thought no more about it, not realizing the rich tradition of [TiÃ³ de
Nadal](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ti%C3%B3_de_Nadal), aka Caga TiÃ³.

{% include image.html caption="Image result for caga tio image" url="/images/travel/tio-nadal.jpg" %}

If you have a moment, one of the clearest explanations of this for English
speakers comes from Viggo Mortensen:

{% include youtube.html shortcode="tO1cuk43HPU" caption="Viggo explains Tio de Nadal" %}

For those not inclined to video (or
[wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ti%C3%B3_de_Nadal)) the short story
is: families bring home these smiling logs, the kids feed them for the whole
month--think a cross between an advent calendar and leaving cookies out for
Santa--and then, after all this loving care.... they beat the log with a stick,
singing a song that literally says, ahem, "poop log!" so it gives them presents.
No kidding, at our [Thanksgiving
dinner](https://travel.jasonrclark.com/first-holidays-abroad-thanksgiving/) we
were discussing this tradition, and the entire table burst out with the song in
unison.

Nothing says Christmas to me like a smiling log pooping presents!
