---
title: "First Holidays Abroad: Thanksgiving"
date: "2019-01-12"
categories: travel
tags:
- spain
- eats
- events
- holiday
---

As an American, the holiday season kicks off in the fourth week of November with
Thanksgiving. This is not a holiday in Spain, but we bucked the trend and
celebrated anyway. And what better way to enjoy the holiday than by introducing
our traditions to coworkers!

The weeks before involved a lot of research into what was available in country,
and what we'd have to improvise around. Turkey (_pavo_ en espaÃ±ol) was the
biggest difficulty. It wasn't hard to find parts--a leg here, a breast
there--but the whole bird was almost unheard of. But a few days before Amber
found a reasonable sized one at [Boqueria
Market](http://www.boqueria.barcelona/home).

{% include image.html caption="Using that paella pan for it's intended purpose ðŸ˜…"
   url="/images/travel/turkey-paella.jpg" %}

Most everything else was available--vegetables, potatoes, breads. But what about
the cranberry sauce?! [Taste of America](https://www.tasteofamerica.es/) to the
rescue! This specialty store is uniquely American. The scent of high-fructose
corn sugar slaps you across the face on entering, as more than half the store is
sugary cereals and candy. But they had the goods a week before the big day. I
heard they ran out closer to the holiday ðŸ˜°. This allowed Amber to introduce the
wonders of American cranberry sauce to our friends amidst gales of laughter.

{% include youtube.html shortcode="OBXRVt29Oo8" caption="" %}

We invited the team I've been working with at New Relic BCN. Among those who
made it were an American couple, an Irishman, and a ton of Spaniards. I was
pleasantly surprised by everyone's enthusiasm leading up to the event. It turns
out, American Thanksgiving is commonly seen in movies and pop culture but
faintly mysterious beyond that. What is this pumpkin pie? What does stuffing
taste like, or is it called dressing? This proved an excellent chance to lift
the veil on this American tradition.

{% include image.html caption="Who doesn't use their paella pan to roast pumpkins?"
   url="/images/travel/squash-paella.jpg" %}

We also pushed the max capacity of our flat for a sit-down meal. There were
about 16 people, every scrap of table space filled with boisterous conversation,
good Spanish wine and charcuterie, galician treats, and American classics.

The holidays have definitely made us more acutely aware of the normal
connections with family that we're missing out on during this grand adventure.
But in the end, sharing this tradition with our new friends was absolutely
something to be thankful for.
