---
title: "London Calling"
date: 2019-09-16
categories: travel
tags:
- london
- uk
---

February in Barcelona. While not too wet by Oregonian standards, the weather was
cool with plenty of gray skies. The bustle of the holidays had passed. The kids
were back in school. The daily routine was settling in again. Homesickness
tickled at everyone, and we were all feeling tired and stretched. It was time to
recapture _why_ we'd come all this way, why we had uprooted our lives. We hadn't
really embraced one major facet of coming to Europe yet.

Travel!

Amber texted me at work "London next weekend?" and we were off.

## Friday

Living in Barcelona, travel to so many places is wonderfully inexpensive. We got
cheap flights on Ryanair, took off midmorning, and soon we were in Great
Britain. It's worth noting that cheap flights to London often land at airports
that are "in" London, but may involve up to an hour worth transit to get into
the city proper. We landed at Stansted, grabbed a train, and headed in.

We stayed at the [Qbic Hotel](https://qbichotels.com/london-city/), a fun, funky
spot in Whitechapel a short walk from the [Aldgate Underground
station](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aldgate_tube_station). Our room was
bright and reasonably sized. They even provided an extra cot so the kids didn't
have to share the futon. A nice breakfast buffet greeted us downstairs so
everyone could be happy with the food to start their day.

Our first activity was candy-making lessons at [Spun
Candy](https://www.spun-candy.com/). We managed to keep it secret from the kids
until we arrived. Needless to say that shook off any travel weariness and
cranks. The folks from the shop mixed the hot sugar, and then we shaped our own
lollipops on the warm stone tables.

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CW0a7SmqD5M&list=PLB6O_88YJvCt98f9IhfCswZaPtuBsa5EF

The staff handled the dangerous parts of candymaking, leaving us to roll
lollies!

{% include image.html
    caption="Cora working in her new favorite medium"
    url="/images/travel/IMG_1915-e1558339034655-768x1024.jpg"
%}

{% include image.html
    caption="Amber getting creative"
    url="/images/travel/IMG_1917-e1558339090332-768x1024.jpg"
%}

Just down the street from the candyshop was another amazing place: [Xi'an Biang
Biang Noodles](http://xianbiangbiangnoodles.com/). This restaurant hand-pulls
their own Chinese noodles, and it was so up our alley both to watch and to eat.
Barcelona has a lot of good Japanese, but we haven't found as much Chinese,
Vietnamese, or Thai as we're used to in Portland. Exciting to find such a
wonderful spot right next to the day's main activity.

{% include image.html
    caption="Watching the magic happen at Xi'an Biang Biang"
    url="/images/travel/IMG_1921-e1558339104529-768x1024.jpg"
%}

## Saturday

A key lesson in traveling with kids is to not cram in too many things. Given
that, our plan for Saturday was simple--visit the Tower of London and then the
Diana Memorial Playground.

After breakfast we got a late start to the [Tower of
London](https://www.hrp.org.uk/tower-of-london/). By the time we arrived the
kids were already verging on "hangry," so we paused at a cafe outside. The Tower
is huge, with numerous different areas to visit. We skipped the exhibit on
Torture at the Tower--bit too gruesome for the kids yet--but went to the White
Tower with room upon room of armor and weaponry on display.

{% include image.html
    caption="The White Tower"
    url="/images/travel/IMG_1923-1024x768.jpg"
%}

A children's room topped the tower with computerized displays and games for the
kids. This kept their interest pretty well. An unfortunately a large number of
stairs were involved, though, which Amber's knee didn't appreciate. I remember
distinctly sitting in this vaulted room with children running rampant
everywhere, pretending at drawing bows and swinging swords and I wondered--what
would this look like to someone who had lived in the Tower as an actual military
stronghold? Would they be amused or dismayed at their center of power turned
playground?

Late in the afternoon we caught a cab out to a playground that we'd heard about
in Kensington Park: [the Diana Memorial
Playground](https://www.royalparks.org.uk/parks/kensington-gardens/things-to-see-and-do/diana-memorial-playground).
Kensington Park itself is a vast stretch of green space in the city, with tons
of walking paths and grass, but the Playground takes it to a whole other level.
It's entirely fenced in to provide a safe space for kids to roam. The gate in is
monitored by staff. Kids can't get in or out on their own, and neither are
adults allowed in without an accompanying child. There's a large scale pirate
ship, hidden pockets in dense bushes, and all manner of other treasures to find.
Unfortunately though, we arrived just 15 minutes before it closed, much to
Asher's dismay. Vigorous promises to return were made.

{% include image.html
    caption="Arrrg"
    url="/images/travel/IMG_7320-1024x768.jpg"
%}

Retreating from the prematurely closed playground, we managed consolation at
[Viet Food](http://vietnamfood.co.uk/vietfood/). The kids' top food is a runoff
between McDonalds (ugh) or pho. Barcelona isn't a strong spot for hot bowls of
soup. London on the other hand fed our souls with the rich broth and tasty
noodles.

{% include image.html
    caption="So. Satisfying."
    url="/images/travel/IMG_7323-e1558340487294-768x1024.jpg"
%}

## Sunday

Sunday morning we skipped breakfast at the hotel to instead trek off to one of
Amber's favorite treats in London--[High Tea at Fortnum and
Mason](https://www.fortnumandmason.com/). For those who haven't had the pleasure
High Tea is not simply a beverage. Oh no, at its fullest expression it is an
avalanche of delicious small bites, perfectly suited to go with that pot of tea.
The children were astonished to learn that they could pick whatever tea they
wanted, or even (gasp) hot chocolate. The tiny cucumber sandwiches on gleaming
silver towers filled Cora's heart and tummy with delight, and the desserts to
follow... all in all, for a slightly fancy outing it was a huge success for
everyone. Amber even obtained a blend of tea that had been discontinued in the
years since our last visit because they keep a massive tome with every blend
they've ever created.

{% include image.html
    caption="High Tea"
    url="/images/travel/IMG_7330-e1568662153117-768x1024.jpg"
%}

After tea we were headed back to fulfill our park promises of the day before,
but ended up waylaid by a bookstore. Though it wasn't evident from the front
when we stepped in, it was a giant [Waterstones](https://www.waterstones.com/)
with multiple floors going up and up will filled with books... _in English_. A
funny thing we'd heard from Asher's teacher was that he was perfectly happy to
read in Spanish or Catalan, but refused in English because translating the
letters to sounds is so much harder. Sorry about your native tongue buddy! In
any case, the lovely staff there helped us find a whole pile of books at just
his level about topics he'd find interesting (lots of reptiles, dinosaurs, and
robots). Cora also made out like a bandit, as books are a thing we have a hard
time refusing, even with our limited shelf space.

The park proved cold but Asher was not daunted and played relentlessly until we
had to leave. Dinner that evening was [Beijing
Dumpling](http://beijingdumpling.co.uk/) for lovely soup dumplings, another
favorite we'd yet to find in Barcelona.

A late flight home, and we were worn but happy with our first major excursion.
We hadn't accomplished all we set out to do in London, but we knew before long
we could return.
