---
title: "Europe 2024: Portugal"
date: 2024-06-29
categories: travel
tags:
- portugal
- castles
- food
---

## Lisbon

For years we'd heard great things about Portugal. Finally it was time to check
it out for ourselves!

{% include image.html caption="Steep hillside with houses in Lisbon" url="/images/travel/2024-Portugal/lisbon.jpg" %}

We took a cab in from the airport and got our first blush of a problem when at
the end of the ride the driver insisted that there was some extra fee per
passenger. This hadn't been mentioned prior, but we were tired from the flight
and rolled with it. Turns out, things aren't quite as standardized and regulated
there as in Barcelona, so it's worth making sure they run the meter and not
letting that sort of stuff by.

{% include image.html caption="Bad vibes only" url="/images/travel/2024-Portugal/bad-vibes.jpg" %}

The neighborhood where we'd rented an apartment was a little rundown but nothing
troubling. We schlepped our luggage upstairs in the tiny elevator. Everything
was in place, including a little garbage can beside the toilet and prominent
signs in multiple languages informing that you couldn't flush the TP. What?
Really? In Europe? This did indeed turn out to be the common state of the areas
we visited and not just a fault of this particular building's aging plumbing.

{% include image.html caption="Lots of cool graffiti though" url="/images/travel/2024-Portugal/crow-and-key.jpg" %}

Another thing to note about Lisbon, though, were the many many hills. We're very
accustomed to walking places when we're traveling. A quick glance at the map
would often look like a reasonably short outing so we could avoid the cab
hassles. Almost without fail, though, any walk of more than a couple blocks
would be confronted by steep stairs climbing skyward, hills with charming if
ankle-threatening cobblestones, and a sheen of sweat by the time you arrived.

## Tiling

Lisbon was, on the whole, a more colorful city than we were used to in
Barcelona. A lot of architecture was vaguely similar, but with far more bright
paint to liven it up.

{% include image.html caption="Building with green tiles and a rounded end" url="/images/travel/2024-Portugal/tiling-building.jpg" %}

Even more distinctive, though, was the tiling which is typical of Portugal.
While not every building was fronted with various classic tile patterns, almost
any walk would reveal at least a couple.

In some areas, the tile was not merely with repeating patterns but with images
amongst the artistic geometry.

{% include image.html caption="More pictorial tiling" url="/images/travel/2024-Portugal/tiling-murals.jpg" %}

This was enough of a regional thing that many different tiles were sold in
tourist locations. Really intricate patterns could be seen inside and out in the
buildings. Given that Lisbon seemed a little run down at times, this use of tile
was a cool thing that counter-balanced what could have been a sort of dreary
urban setting.

{% include image.html caption="Tight shot of bright orange tile" url="/images/travel/2024-Portugal/tiling-flowers.jpg" %}

{% include image.html caption="Green and red starbursts" url="/images/travel/2024-Portugal/tiling-stars.jpg" %}

## Castelo Sao Jorge

In the city, one of the major sights was the Castelo Sao Jorge which crouched up
on the top of a very tall hill. On our second day there, we started the hike up
though we were being frequently passed by small carts with padded seats, zipping
along to bring folks to the castle. We decided less than halfway up that this
was the better plan and when an empty cart asked if we wanted a ride we said
sure and hopped on.

{% include image.html caption="View of the city from Castelo Sao Jorge" url="/images/travel/2024-Portugal/palace-views.jpg" %}

In the outer courts of the castle, one of the most immediate points of interest
were a whole bunch of peacocks which roamed around free.

{% include image.html caption="lol" url="/images/travel/2024-Portugal/peakcocks-about.jpg" %}

It had been a while since we'd eaten when we arrived, so we grabbed some food
from the little outdoor cafe that was available near the entrance. This gave us
a chance to watch the peacocks... and to be watched very closely by them in
turn. They hovered endlessly around the area, clearly looking for a hand-out
which we were only too willing to provide.

{% include image.html caption="Asher feeding the peacocks" url="/images/travel/2024-Portugal/peacocks-feeding.jpg" %}

The castle contained a museum with history of the city and region. Along with
that, it also had a camera obscura in one of the tall towers. While I associate
these assemblies of lenses and mirrors that project an image with the distant
past, it turns out this one in Lisbon was only installed in 1998. It was a
pretty cool way to get a view of the city, though.

{% include image.html caption="Lisbon through the camera obscura" url="/images/travel/2024-Portugal/palace-camera-obscura.jpg" %}

As we were getting ready to go, there was a long set of stairs, the final
destination of which wasn't quite visible. Asher really wanted to see if it was
an exit, even though it wasn't marked as one. The gals stayed smartly up top,
but I trooped down with my energetic son, and guess what? It wasn't an exit, so
we climbed back up.

{% include image.html caption="Asher wanted to see where the stairs went" url="/images/travel/2024-Portugal/asher-on-the-stairs.jpg" %}

## Sintra

Our other big outing took us away from Lisbon to the town of Sintra. This
allowed us to visit not one but two interesting spots -- the [National Palace of
Pena](https://www.parquesdesintra.pt/en/parks-monuments/park-and-national-palace-of-pena/),
and the [Moorish
Castle](https://www.parquesdesintra.pt/en/parks-monuments/the-moorish-castle/).
We were thankfully able to book a driver through Bolt at a reasonable price,
even going between towns in this fashion.

{% include image.html caption="National Palace of Pena" url="/images/travel/2024-Portugal/palace.jpg" %}

The Palace was rather busy, with timed entry for folks, long lines for the buses
that made the final approach and people everywhere. However, it was an
impressive sight perched up on the hill, with bright yellow walls and
complicated stonework everywhere.

{% include image.html caption="Crowded exterior at the National Palace of Pena" url="/images/travel/2024-Portugal/palace-crowds.jpg" %}

The Palace was very much not an ancient castle, "only" dating from the 1850s.
This was evident in the size of many of the spaces, which were larger than I'm
used to seeing in older castles. It also showed up in the frequency with which
different chambers sported bathrooms, which must have been rather a luxury
innovation at the time. The interiors were lushly decorated, though, and it was
beautiful to tour through.

{% include image.html caption="Dining room at the National Palace. We weren't
invited to stay." url="/images/travel/2024-Portugal/palace-interior.jpg" %}

As we'd seen elsewhere, patterned tiling was in much evidence through the
National Palace.

{% include image.html caption="Tiled courtyard" url="/images/travel/2024-Portugal/palace-courtyard.jpg" %}

Downhill from the National Palace was the Moorish Castle. This felt far more
like a true castle, old enough to have fallen largely apart in many areas. We
walked down to it, through deeply forested hillsides.

{% include image.html caption="Woods near Sintra" url="/images/travel/2024-Portugal/woods-by-the-castle.jpg" %}

The day was actually rather cool, and coming to the castle that didn't get much
better as the winds kicked up with little of the castle body left in some areas
to block the breeze.

{% include image.html caption="Tree growing within the castle" url="/images/travel/2024-Portugal/tree-in-the-castle.jpg" %}

Perched as it was on a hill, the Moorish Castle used its surroundings to good
effect. This meant that the walls which you could climb up onto were not even
close to a simple flat rectangle. They swooped up and down in either direction,
following the folds of the hilltops.

{% include image.html caption="Stairs down" url="/images/travel/2024-Portugal/castle-more-stairs.jpg" %}

{% include image.html caption="Stairs up" url="/images/travel/2024-Portugal/castle-stairs.jpg" %}

All the climbing was worth it, though, for the stunning view from the highest
points.

{% include image.html caption="View from the Moorish Castle" url="/images/travel/2024-Portugal/castle-view.jpg" %}

After we caught the Bolt back to Lisbon, we had it drop us off at the TimeOut
Market. We got there late enough the market portion of things was largely shut
down, but a huge open space there was devoted to many different food vendors so
we could all choose what we wanted. Following my meal, I tried out a sampler of
different ports which was lovely. My family meanwhile took advantage of the
gelato situation available. A massive screen in the center of the tall tables
set up for folks to eat at was showing the European Championships (France versus
Belgium while we were there, so no one got too rowdy.)

{% include image.html caption="Eating at the TimeOut Market" url="/images/travel/2024-Portugal/food-court.jpg" %}

## The Food

As ever, a big part of our time in Portugal revolved around food. We scheduled
to take a cooking class. It started with a trip to the [Mercado 31 de Janeiro
market](https://informacoeseservicos.lisboa.pt/contactos/diretorio-da-cidade/mercado-31-de-janeiro)
where our instructor showed us a variety of local vegetables and meats, and
gathered up what we'd need for the class. It was a relatively big group cooking
together, with some other folks from the US and two people from Switzerland (who
interestingly spoke the rare Romansh language and filled us in on all the
details about it.)

The dishes bore a lot of resemblance to things we'd had and made in Spain, but
with some twists here and there. The kids enjoyed blending a gazpacho-like soup
and coiling up a fruit rolled cake.

{% include image.html caption="lol" url="/images/travel/2024-Portugal/cooking-class.jpg" %}

One of the treats that folks talk about in Portugal endlessly is pastel de nata.
These are tasty little egg custards in a flaky shell. Easily eaten in a couple
of bites, they're available all over the place. We found a pretty good location
for them near the Castelo Sao Jorge. Sadly, we had also just learned of Asher's
egg allergy not long before the trip, which took some of the shine off this
delectable treat.

{% include image.html caption="lol" url="/images/travel/2024-Portugal/pastel-de-nata.jpg" %}

One evening we went to a fado restaurant, which is a classical combination of
soulful folks music and good cooking. The spot we chose was probably among the
classier places we went on the trip, and the music was engaging even though we
couldn't follow the words which were undoubtedly fraught with meaning. The menu
had some lovely steak, pork cheeks, and duck. I also sampled the vinho verde, a
local vine variety made with newer grapes giving it a bright flavor.

Probably the highlight of our eating in Portugal, though, was [Cervejaria
Ramiro](https://www.cervejariaramiro.com/). Like many folks, we were aware of
this seafood restaurant through Anthony Bourdain who sang its praises for the
quality and freshness. He wasn't wrong. Although it had been many years since
Mr. Bourdain visited -- and the small spot depicted on the show had now burrowed
its way through room after room, level after level of the building it was in --
the seafood absolutely delivered. Much of it was offered by weight and there
were so many varieties of shellfish it was hard to know precisely what was being
picked, but what a lovely problem to have.

{% include image.html caption="lol" url="/images/travel/2024-Portugal/tasty-seafood.jpg" %}

It wasn't uncommon for restaurants to have paper table covering that it was okay
to write and draw on, which led to a family habit of doing hangman along the
way. That led to a highlight of my life as a dad to date when I managed to
Rickroll Cora in hangman. She then proceeded to respond with games drawn from
Monty Python. I may have my faults as a parent, but I've done something right.

{% include image.html caption="lol" url="/images/travel/2024-Portugal/never-gonna-give-you-up.jpg" %}

## Farewell

That brought us to our final days in Lisbon and Europe for the summer. We
encountered then one of the downsides of apartments versus hotels, because our
flight wasn't until the afternoon but we had to leave at eleven. We asked around
at a couple of the hotels in the block, but they were rather uninterested in
holding bags when we hadn't taken a room out. Ah well.

{% include image.html caption="lol" url="/images/travel/2024-Portugal/angry-fountain.jpg" %}

This led us to the airport many long hours early. We looked at the map and it
seemed that a park wasn't too far away, so the plan was for the ladies to hang
with the bagged while I took Asher to get his wiggles out before the long
flights began.

Sadly, like many US airports I'm sure, Lisbon had literally no way to walk to or
from the airport. We followed every path we could, but there was no way out
without walking on huge multi-lane roads that plainly weren't meant for
pedestrians. Defeated, we went back and rejoined the throng of people waiting
for their flights.

After that, the flight out was delayed back to Dublin where our primary
round-trip tickets were returning home from. We got in super late, and the kids
were on the verge of breaking down. We assumed that hunger was part of the
reason, but only a chippy was open across the way. We bought a pile of deeply
fried, not that appetizing food which went almost untouched. At least we got a
bit of sleep before hopping the flights back home the next morning.

{% include image.html caption="lol" url="/images/travel/2024-Portugal/obligatory-pdx.jpg" %}
