---
title: "Europe 2024: Barcelona and Menorca"
date: 2024-06-21
categories: travel
tags:
- barcelona
- menorca
- friends
- food
---

## Roadtripping

While I like to think that our family has a relatively international flair, we
are suckers for one deep American trait -- the roadtrip. Long hours in a car
aren't something we dread. We enjoy it!

{% include image.html caption="Roadtripping in Spain"
url="/images/travel/2024-Spain/spain-driving.jpeg" %}

Given that, we rented a car to travel from Bilbao to Barcelona. This was about a
six hour drive, which is somewhere in the mid-range for us in a single day's
travel normally. From the relative greenery of Bilbao, it felt a lot like the
transition to Eastern Oregon going over the Cascade Mountains as we moved into
drier parts of Spain.

As usual in our family, Amber drove. We found that there were a lot of well
stocked, nice rest stops along the way. We only had to pause at one for the kids
to blow of steam from an argument and made good time. There was traffic coming
into Barcelona late in the afternoon, but nothing too bad. The familiarity of
the city helped in finding our way to the place we were staying downtown.

## Favorites in BCN

The time in Barcelona was much less focused on sights and more on people. We
caught up with so many of our friends, it was amazing. Asher in particular got
to have sleepovers with his two besties who he'd been missing. They clicked just
like no time had passed -- Minecraft surpasses all boundaries of time and space.
I also spent time with several former coworkers, some still with New Relic,
others who had moved on like myself.

{% include image.html caption="Asher at Dela Crem"
url="/images/travel/2024-Spain/dela-crem-asher.jpeg" %}

Of course, we also made it a point to visit our favorite locations across the
city. This meant multiple stops at places like [Dela
Crem](https://delacrem.cat/) -- the best gelato in Barcelona,
[Vinitus](https://www.laflautagroup.com/en) for incredible tapas, even an
evening at the [Green Room](https://www.greenroombarcelona.com/), the "Irish"
bar we often met friends at out in Poblenou.

{% include image.html caption="Cora at Dela Crem"
url="/images/travel/2024-Spain/dela-crem-cora.jpeg" %}

Less fun, we dropped into our old bank in Poblenou. We'd kept the account there
with a little money in it, but when our phone numbers changed we lost access to
log in. That could only be fixed in person. Oops! In classic Spanish-banking
style, it only took two and a half hour of waiting to get it resolved. 😰

## San Juan

We happened to be in town with friends across the holiday of [San
Juan](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Saint_John%27s_Eve#Spain). This celebration
is made with fireworks and bonfires. Let me tell you, I thought Americans were
nuts about fireworks but the Spanish put us to shame! The size of things folks
are willing to set off in busy streets and beaches, the bonfires -- with
fireworks being thrown into them... it was loud, boisterous, and I'm sure
injury-prone for some folks.

{% include image.html caption="San Juan bonfire in the streets"
url="/images/travel/2024-Spain/san-juan-bonfire.jpeg" %}

Once dark finally settled, we stayed out in the streets for some hours, keeping
a sensible distance from the most extreme while enjoying our own batch of
sparkly mayhem.

{% include image.html caption="Our San Juan contribution"
url="/images/travel/2024-Spain/san-juan-ours.jpeg" %}

## Katana Experience

During an on-site in Barcelona I had been fortunate to attend, our manager
Juanjo had planned an awesome activity -- the [Samurai
Experience](https://samuraiexperience.es/en/). Ever since doing that with my
coworkers, I'd had it in mind for my son Asher, who is absolutely obsessed with
swords.

{% include image.html caption="Katana work takes focus"
url="/images/travel/2024-Spain/katana-focus.jpeg" %}

Things start with dressing in suitable outfits and learning about the history of
samurai. Then you get to practice with wooden swords, nicely balanced and
weighted like the real thing.

{% include image.html caption="Amber showing how it's done"
url="/images/travel/2024-Spain/katana-cut-above.jpeg" %}

At last, after all the preparations, you get to use the real katana. Those
blades are amazingly intimidating! So sharp, you can really feel the danger
holding them. We got to make cuts first on a foam pool noodle, then with a
rolled bamboo mat.

{% include youtube.html shortcode="pVSmkFQHNQc" caption="Asher's a natural" %}

No huge surprise that Asher was the best of the crew. He didn't want to leave.

{% include youtube.html shortcode="j6dXx02Tybw" caption="Family war" %}

After the slicing with real swords, we switched back to practice blades now
buffered with foam and went to war with one another. Alliances were made and
broken, but we all came out laughing, sweating, and not too bruised.

{% include image.html caption="The family giving Asher his send-off"
url="/images/travel/2024-Spain/katana-family.jpeg" %}

{% include image.html caption="Sibling love (with katanas)"
url="/images/travel/2024-Spain/katana-siblings.jpeg" %}

## To Menorca

Our next stop after Barcelona was a trip to Menorca, one of the Balearic
islands. And yes, that is Menorca, not Mallorca. A much chiller vibe, with less
party and excessive resort culture.

We shared this stage of the trip with our dear friends Ben and Anna who live in
Barcelona. We all got up early for the flight to the island. Once landed, we
gathered our luggage and the rental car. After a lunch down the hill from our
villa, Ben and I ended up hiking up the hill for reasons of vehicle and luggage
space. This was soon regretted in the heat.

Still, the destination was worth the trek. The villa behind sliding gates had a
large outdoor space with a pool, a huge porch, and lovely views of the sea.

{% include image.html caption="View from our villa in Menorca"
url="/images/travel/2024-Spain/menorca-villa.jpeg" %}

Even more exciting, we had a guest (or were guests of?) in the form of a turtle
quickly nicknamed Tortie. The kids have a soft spot for our shelled friends, so
tracking, feeding, and otherwise enjoying our reptile companion was a highlight
of the time.

{% include image.html caption="Our villa's resident turtle, nicknamed 'Tortie'"
url="/images/travel/2024-Spain/tortie.jpeg" %}

The villa had a barbecue area which Ben and I tried to use. We were a little shy
on fuel and then the evening winds kicked up. We ended up finishing the chicken
inside on the stove top. Meals were taken outdoors at a shaded table on the
porch.

One of our main outings was to playa de Fornells, a beach with shallow warm
water that was a pleasure to wade into. After much begging we also rented a
paddleboard that Cora enjoyed taking out a rather long ways from shore. We
drifted and watched her skitter across the smooth water.

{% include image.html caption="Playa de Fornells"
url="/images/travel/2024-Spain/fornells.jpeg" %}

We largely cooked for ourselves at the villa, but one night took a reservation
at [Sa Punta](https://www.sapuntamenorca.com/), a restaurant in Es Castell that
came highly recommended. It didn't disappoint. Located on the narrow end of a
spit of land out into surrounding bays, the views from the restaurant were
awesome. Parking was tough, but Amber is my road warrior and got it done.

{% include image.html caption="Night view from Sa Punta"
url="/images/travel/2024-Spain/sa-punta-night.jpeg" %}

The meal was fresh and exciting, with so much good seafood and everything
perfectly prepared. We dressed up sharper than usual, and for the kids it was a
higher class restaurant experience than they'd had in a long time... maybe ever.

{% include image.html caption="Cora looking fabulous at Sa Punta"
url="/images/travel/2024-Spain/sa-punta-cora.jpeg" %}
{% include image.html caption="My ladies at Sa Punta"
url="/images/travel/2024-Spain/sa-punta-ladies.jpeg" %}
{% include image.html caption="Good food, good friends at Sa Punta"
url="/images/travel/2024-Spain/sa-punta.jpeg" %}

Another highlight on the island was that it had a couple of prehistoric sites
with structures called talaiot to visit. These large stones were stood up in the
late second millennia BC, and we stomped around for quite a while in the heat
viewing them.

{% include image.html caption="Prehistoric (talaoit) monuments in Menorca"
url="/images/travel/2024-Spain/talaoit.jpeg" %}

It's humbling to see areas like this, ruins of a culture that I'd never even
heard the name of before, but that have endured across so many years. We
imagined what it was like to live on this island so long ago, when getting there
wasn't a quick airplane trip across the water, when subsisting in the arid
climate must have been its own sort of struggle.

{% include image.html caption="Underground at the talaoit site"
url="/images/travel/2024-Spain/talaoit-cave.jpeg" %}

Our final beach trip was to a location a bit more off the beaten track which
turned out to be a lot more out of the way than expected. First the Google maps
were kind of misleading, so we got turned around trying to find the access.
Perhaps because of that mix-up, the path in was nearly a kilometer with a lot of
hills, which wasn't awesome with three of our party struggling with knee
problems. After all that, the water was super wavy and clogged with so much
seaweed that I was still finding it in my shorts days later. Guess not every
beach is a winner.

That brought us to our final days on Menorca. We ended up flying out on June 29,
our anniversary, for Lisbon. Packing and airports, always the best way to
celebrate another year of wedded bliss!
