---
title: "Europe 2024: Bilbao"
date: 2024-06-18
categories: travel
tags:
- spain
- bilbao
- art
- food
---

Our flight out of Dublin was uneventful, bringing us to Bilbao and the
Continent. At the airport we gathered our bags and rolled to an infrequently
visited part of Spain for us -- the car rental desk. Amber had a reservation all
lined up, and in short order we were examining a car in the humid parking
garage. Our vehicle here in Spain was nearly the biggest one available... so a
mid-sized hatchback ぃ.

{% include image.html
    caption="Crossing the Nervi贸n River in Bilbao"
    url="/images/travel/Bilbao/EU-2024-Bilbao-River.jpeg"
%}

Bilbao was much greener and hillier than the parts of Spain that we were used
to. We drove into town, located where we would be staying, and then circled
until we found a cramped parking garage drilling down into the earth.

Our accommodations in Bilbao were at the [Santiago
Apartments](https://santiagoapartments.es/en/santiago-apartments-bilbao-en/). As
the name suggests, it was more apartment than hotel, with a small kitchen, two
bedrooms (Cora slept on the fold-out couch in the living room), and most
importantly a washing machine. For the extended trip we packed only 5 days worth
of clothes, so having routine stops with laundry was a key element of the plan.

That evening we met up with one of my former coworkers from New Relic. He gave
us a walking tour of parts of Bilbao on our way from the apartment to dinner. He
quizzed the kids, with little success, about who the _second_ president of the
United States had been. Of course they know about George Washington, but what
happened after was hazier. The reason for his question became clear when we
passed a statue of John Adams, who apparently [visited the Basque country to
learn about their governmental
systems](https://buber.net/Basque/2020/07/05/basque-fact-of-the-week-john-adamss-basque-adventure/).

{% include image.html
    caption="John Adams, the second President of the United States, seen in
    Bilbao"
    url="/images/travel/Bilbao/EU-2024-Bilbao-JohnAdams.jpeg"
%}

Dinner was at a place called
[Kokken](http://restaurantekokken.com/index_english.html). I hadn't realized
when we were choosing, but it was a "surprise" restaurant, with a fixed but
reasonably priced menu. This turned out to be a big challenge for the kids.
They're relatively adventurous eaters compared to many of their friends, but
seafood is at the edge of their comfort zone. Given that, the large cubes of
tuna with chorizo sauce and cuttlefish in teriyaki were a lot to ask. As is our
usual practice, we offered them cold hard cash for trying bites. They made out
like bandits.

The pinnacle of the evening was the sweetbreads. Those in the know are aware
that these are the thymus, but we'd misunderstood it to be, ahem, testicles. We
obviously didn't inform the children of this until they'd tried their bite. The
furor at what they thought thought they'd tried was worth the vexation. The kids
may never trust us offering foods that they can't identify again.

---

The next morning we had breakfast at a typical little Spanish cafe. The menu was
such a nourishing return to things we love and miss in the States -- multiple
different tortillas, bocadillos with jam贸n, cafe con leche. We ended up
returning to the spot every morning of our visit because it was just the thing.

{% include image.html
    caption="Breakfast at Cafe Scala"
    url="/images/travel/Bilbao/EU-2024-Bilbao-Breakfast.jpeg"
%}

Our location in Bilbao had been chosen largely because of how close it was to
the main attraction of the city, the [Guggenheim
Museum](https://www.guggenheim-bilbao.eus/en). For those not big in the art
scene, the Guggenheim is one of the most famous and respected museums for modern
art in the world. I went in knowing basically only that, and it was a great day
of learning and reflection.

{% include image.html
    caption="Arriving at the Guggenheim"
    url="/images/travel/Bilbao/EU-2024-Bilbao-Guggenheim.jpeg"
%}

Upon entering, one of the first large exhibits was a work titled ["The Matter of
Time"](https://www.guggenheim-bilbao.eus/en/the-collection/works/the-matter-of-time).
This enormous set of sculptures is made from from weathered steel that was aged
to give it fascinating colors and textures. A smaller room off the exhibit
showed off a scale model of the work with lots of detailed wall hangings
describing its construction.

{% include image.html
    caption="The Matter of Time"
    url="/images/travel/Bilbao/EU-2024-Bilbao-Sculpture2.jpeg"
%}

The whorls and angles of the whole thing are mysterious and engulfing, with
several sections that you walk into without being able to see where it will
lead. It's so huge that Asher was free to dash around, while the rest of us
moved at a slower, more thoughtful pace.

{% include image.html
    caption="Walking through the corridors of The Matter of Time"
    url="/images/travel/Bilbao/EU-2024-Bilbao-Sculpture.jpeg"
%}

Being modern art, there was a wide variety of different works. Some looked dark
and moody, introspective and spare. Others were bold and bright, even whimsical.

{% include image.html
    caption="Badminton anyone?"
    url="/images/travel/Bilbao/EU-2024-Bilbao-Badminton.jpeg"
%}

A nice aspect of traveling with teenagers now was that we could split up a bit
and proceed at our own paces. Asher, as you might expect if you know him, did
something of a speedrun. Cora, who's been digging deep into art at school and
home, took a more meditative pace.

{% include image.html
    caption="Asher with one of the works he enjoyed"
    url="/images/travel/Bilbao/EU-2024-Bilbao-Guggenheim-BigArt.jpeg"
%}

It was really fun to spend the time there, especially with Cora, and see her
experiencing just how broad the world of art can be.

{% include image.html
    caption="In, which we joked was just mirrored Monty Python fandom ('ni')"
    url="/images/travel/Bilbao/EU-2024-Bilbao-In.jpeg"
%}

On our way back to the apartment in early afternoon, we were also on the prowl
for food. We happened to see [Porrue](https://www.porrue.com/?lang=en). This had
been one of the other options that my coworker had mentioned. It had been
more upscale than we'd wanted for the kids with an evening crowd. But
lunchtime (2pm is totally lunchtime in Spain)? Seemed worth trying. This
proved to be an awesome choice.

The meal started off with a feature that amazed and delighted our children. It's
common practice to provide a bread and olive oil, but this rocketed to the next
level. They wheeled over an entire cart with multiple types of bread and olive
oils to choose from. The flavors really showed off the range of olive oils. Some
were peppery, some fresh, all of them delicious. The waiters seemed quite
pleased with the kids' excitement, and it was hard work getting them to slow
down on the bread before the actual meal.

Soon after came a tomato salad, so simple but so delicious. Again, the olive oil
was key, not only drizzled over the from-your-garden level tomatoes, but in
little jellied pearls as well that popped on your tongue.

{% include image.html
    caption="Tomato salad at Porrue"
    url="/images/travel/Bilbao/EU-2024-Bilbao-Porrue-Tomato.jpeg"
%}

Among the most dynamic parts of the meal was the "Sliced Bellota Jam贸n with
salmorejo and rega帽谩 crushed with mallet." This most favorite of Spanish
products came with the creamy salmorejo (tomato soup) and on top of a shell of
cracker-like bread that you smack with a mallet to break into pieces.

{% include image.html
    caption="Sliced Bellota Jam贸n with salmorejo and rega帽谩 crushed with mallet."
    url="/images/travel/Bilbao/EU-2024-Bilbao-Porrue-Jamon.jpeg"
%}

Very traditionally Basque, we ordered the txuleton, a big hunk of lovely beef
cooked to perfection. Where many cuts of beef in Spain are overly thin for my
taste, this Basque preparation has none of that. It's thick, with lovely
marbling and fatty edges crisped up on the grill.

I'm a huge fan of seafood, and Spain always delivers. Here I was able to have
[percebes, also known as goose beck
barnacles](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Goose_barnacle). These also came on
their own grilled with special long tweezers for prying the salty little nuggets
of goodness from their admittedly odd shaped shells. The kids were
unimpressed, so I had stepped up as the family goat (in the barn animal
cleaning up, not the greatest of all time ).

{% include image.html
    caption="Percebes"
    url="/images/travel/Bilbao/EU-2024-Bilbao-Porrue-Percebes.jpeg"
%}

I don't often seek out wine, but for this nice of a meal it seemed a waste not
to let them pair things. So many delicious whites and tintos! They also served
us a house aperitif at the end. I love the way that in Spain it's common for
places to have their own vemuts or other tasty beverages that are steeped in
house, utterly unique in their local blend.

{% include image.html
    caption="A tasty sip after the meal"
    url="/images/travel/Bilbao/EU-2024-Bilbao-Vino.jpeg"
%}

The meal had many other courses, including the porrue (leek) from which the
restaurant took its name, mushrooms with egg, steak tartare. There was no lunch
menu, and this ended up as our most expensive meal of the whole trip but such a
revelation to the kids of how creatively food can be done. Utterly stuffed both
in our minds from art and our stomachs from the meal, we crashed back at the
apartment and rested the remainder of the day.

---

Living in Barcelona for four years, spanning COVID which hampered our travel
plans around the country, had given me a particular idea of the sort of climate
in Spain -- dry and scrubby, generally hot and humid. While Bilbao continued to
meet the later criteria, it revealed my misconceptions on the first point. The
hillsides there were so lush and green, a welcome feature for us Oregonians.

{% include image.html
    caption="Beautiful green countryside around Bilbao"
    url="/images/travel/Bilbao/EU-2024-Bilbao-Txakoli2.jpeg"
%}

Our last full day in Bilbao we went to visit restaurant way up in the hills on
the edge of the city. The views were excellent up those narrow winding roads,
fringed with all sorts of trees and growing things.

{% include image.html
    caption="Txakoli Simon"
    url="/images/travel/Bilbao/EU-2024-Bilbao-Txakoli.jpeg"
%}

[Txakoli Simon](https://txakolisimon.com/) is a highly rated txuleteria (aka
steakhouse) that Amber found in rewatching [Parts
Unknown.](https://explorepartsunknown.com/san-sebastian/the-perfect-day-in-bilbao/)
Though it had been many years since Anthony Bourdain's visit, it held up to
expectations -- some of the finest beef I've ever had, served up simply, with a
side-grill to ruin it ourselves if we felt the need (we didn't). We were among
the first people there for the day (typically American), and Asher took
advantage of running around in the lush yard to blow off some steam.

{% include image.html
    caption="Txuleton done right"
    url="/images/travel/Bilbao/EU-2024-Bilbao-Chuleton.jpeg"
%}

Bilbao had treated us well, but it was time to start moving on. The rental car
set us up for the next stage -- road trip!
