---
title: "Europe 2025: Bologna"
date: 2025-08-09
categories: travel
tags:
- bologna
- italy
- classes
- food
---

## Getting There

The flight from Athens to Bologna was a mixed bag. We were right up at the
front in the second row, and oddly one of the seats in the first row wasn't
present so I actually had leg room. But, being Ryanair, the boarding was
significantly delayed and people were cranky. Amber also felt unusually
nauseated on the plane. She gets motion sick pretty easily, but we were glad to
hit the ground in Bologna.

It was hot when we got outside and found a late taxi. By this point it was a
little after midnight, and we showed the driver our address. He shook his head.
"Sundays, the center of city is closed. I can't drive all the way there."
Nervously we agreed for him to take us as close as he could manage, imagining as
we did schlepping a kilometer with our three big bags in tow over cobblestones.
Fortunately, it turned out to only be about three or four blocks from where the
Sunday only-walking zone kicked in to our apartment.

{% include image.html caption="Interesting language choices for programmers" url="/images/travel/2025-Bologna/bologna-scala-c.jpg" %}

We buzzed in and very tall, old looking wooden doors swung open to us. Amber had
received a PDF file with multiple pages of instructions in colorful text and
separate numbered boxes. We managed to find the cabinet of lock boxes to get the
key, but for several minutes couldn't figure out which one was ours. Tired, hot,
and frazzled, it felt like an escape room puzzle box. Eventually we reviewed the
sheet again and found where the lock box number was listed after trying the code
unsuccessfully on about half of them.

The elevator up to our flat was painted a bright red color. Unlike almost any
elevator I've ever been in, the instant you pressed the button for your floor,
the doors started slamming closed. This proved to be a fun game for us
throughout the time pretending we'd shut the door out on each other.

The flat was up on the fifth floor, with a nice open plan and wood
floors and the bed up on a loft. The appliances were all new, and it looked
pretty apparent that this was a pure rental, not someone's actual apartment.
Also it was rather steamy being on the top and exposed to sunlight during the
day. The instructions asked to keep AC use to a minimum, but it was hard to keep
the temperature liveable at all as it turned out Bologna was facing a heatwave
that week. So much for cooling down a little post Crete!

{% include image.html caption="The apartment" url="/images/travel/2025-Bologna/bologna-apartment.jpg" %}

The artwork in the apartment was an odd mix. There was a large painting of an
angel who looked either in ecstasy or about ready to pass out. Beside it were a
couple of prints that looked to be from Alaska. Nice bookshelves lined the walls
with a healthy selection of travel related books and random Italian volumes.

{% include image.html caption="Art in the place" url="/images/travel/2025-Bologna/bologna-angel.jpg" %}

We flopped down into the bed as soon as it got cool enough, glad to have arrived
at the next stage of our journey.

{% include image.html caption="I <3 Bologna" url="/images/travel/2025-Bologna/bologna-street-art-heart.jpg" %}

## Cooking Classes

As anyone who knows us is aware, food is our jam. Given that, a major component
of our time in Italy was local cooking classes. We scheduled these through the
excellent [Cesarine](https://cesarine.com) website, and could not have been
happier with the results.

Our first full day in Bologna was a class with
[Maurizio](https://www.instagram.com/il_cesarino_maurizio). We took breakfast at
an outdoor cafe in the plaza across from our apartment where sadly they refused
to make Amber's cappuccino iced ("No freddo!"). After we walked the fifteen
minutes out towards the edge of the city walls for the class at 11am. It was
already hot enough that we were second-guessing whether the walking had been a
good idea, but we arrived with a subtle glow about us.

{% include image.html caption="Cooking with Maurizio" url="/images/travel/2025-Bologna/bologna-cooking-with-maritzio.jpg" %}

While we've taken classes before in spaces that are designed for classes, we
love this style which just takes place in people's homes. Maurizio had a lovely
apartment with an unfortunately blazing porch, filled with eclectic furniture
that perfectly suited it. We also got to enjoy his little dog, Dante, who
constantly wanted to chase after the ball.

{% include image.html caption="Dante, ever vigilant" url="/images/travel/2025-Bologna/bologna-dante.jpg" %}

With logo-emblazoned aprons on, we set into making pasta from scratch of two
different types -- a ravioli and a fettucini. This being northern Italy, these
were made with flour and egg.

{% include image.html caption="Ready to cook!" url="/images/travel/2025-Bologna/bologna-ready-to-cook.jpg" %}

One time in the distant past we had made fresh pasta ourselves, but this turned
out to be much easier than our memories. You make a little hill of flour, then
with your fingers in the classic Italian pose form a crater or volcano into
which you crack an egg. 100g of flour, more of less, work for one egg. You then
slowly whisk up the egg, pulling flour into the mix until it turns to a ball of
dough.

Once the dough has come together, with sprinkles of extra flour if it's still
too sticky, you knead it out by hand for a while. This mostly involves folding
it over in half, then squishing it before repeating. As someone who doesn't like
getting my hands messy this stage was mildly stretching, but I went along.

{% include image.html caption="Pasta rests, but we don't" url="/images/travel/2025-Bologna/bologna-pasta-resting.jpg" %}

Once the dough had reached a texture that Maurizio could tell was right, we left
it to rest for a half hour in plastic so the gluten could develop. While we did
that, we prepared the filling for our ravioli, with fresh ricotta cheese and
sauteed spinach. I enjoyed seeing Maurizio's kitchen where he had a full on
electric slicer for salamis and other meats. Standard issue in Italy apparently.

{% include image.html caption="Filling prep" url="/images/travel/2025-Bologna/bologna-raviolli-filling.jpg" %}

After the filling was ready and the dough sufficiently rested, we got down to
rolling it out. This again was more to Amber's skill set than mine, but we got
things out into a thin enough layer. For the ravioli it was then a matter of
spreading the little balls of filling and folding over before cutting between
then with a specialized tool.

{% include image.html caption="Keep it rolling" url="/images/travel/2025-Bologna/bologna-rolling-pasta.jpg" %}

The fettuccine, while possible to slice by hand, was better served with a custom
tool called a "chitarra" (aka guitar) where you simply set the rolled pasta over
wires and pressed down to make even cuts.

{% include image.html caption="Perfect fettuccine" url="/images/travel/2025-Bologna/bologna-perfect-fettuccine.jpg" %}

The end results were delicious, even from our amateur preparations. The lovely
local wines helped out I'm sure.

{% include image.html caption="Ravioli served with thyme and a little Parmesan" url="/images/travel/2025-Bologna/bologna-raviolli.jpg" %}

Our second class, also through Cesarine, was with
[Paola](https://cesarine.com/en/h/paolat-bologna). We learned from our first
experience and taxied there, as it was equally hot and her apartment was even
further out from the city center.

{% include image.html caption="Paola's sunny kitchen" url="/images/travel/2025-Bologna/bologna-suns.jpg" %}

This class covered a different slice of foods with a little overlap in pasta
making in general. We made piadina, an Italian flat bread kind of like a pita
but -- at least in this case -- softer and a little firmer. It made a delicious
start.

{% include image.html caption="As you knead it" url="/images/travel/2025-Bologna/bologna-kneading-pasta.jpg" %}

Paola showed us the tricks to make tortellino (a specific size of tortellini).
Much of the initial part of the pasta was familiar now, but she disagreed on a
couple points, such as folding over and oil in the water for pasta. Controversy
of the cooks! In any case, we learned the easy technique for folding over the
tortellino

{% include image.html caption="Perfect tortellino" url="/images/travel/2025-Bologna/bologna-tortellini.jpg" %}

The meal concluded with tiramisu, prepared pretty easily in small cups. We dined
on Paola's back porch in the shade by her lovely garden, and all was well with
the world.

## Food Tour

Along with the cooking, we also had the opportunity to take a day long food tour
to see how three different Italian classics were made -- Parmigiano Reggiano,
balsamico tradizionale, and prosciutto. Our guide picked us up from outside our
apartment and had a car to drive us to the various locations, along with
arrangements pre-made with the providers for our visit.

{% include image.html caption="Welcome to the home of Parmesan" url="/images/travel/2025-Bologna/bologna-parmigiano.jpg" %}

The first stop was where real Parmesan is made. Like all of the foods we
experienced that day, it's a DOP product, meaning that it's strictly restricted
by not only location but process and ingredients. The dry white cheese in a
plastic bottle this is not! Each location is controlled and tracked, with its
own number that you can trace back the product you bought to the very spot it
originated.

We spent quite a bit of the tour dressed up in paper gowns with foot covers
while the workers went about their tasks with the huge copper vats. Although
some amount of technology has been allowed into the process (witness the
cleaning video below), it still includes some very manual steps. The
judgement of when things are ready is also a facet where humans have yet to
be replaced.

Here are a few too many videos of the process in action.

{% include youtube.html shortcode="zV6RPuTv1HY" caption="Cutting the cheese" %}
{% include youtube.html shortcode="e5lRoJj3u4U" caption="Hoisting Parmesan" %}
{% include youtube.html shortcode="db47IOu5wqw" caption="Retrieving the Parmesan" %}
{% include youtube.html shortcode="HTpCsxx4dRI" caption="Cleaning up" %}

A byproduct of the process is ricotta, which is made by recooking the whey
that's made in the vats. This was being packed as we ventured through the
factory.

{% include image.html caption="" url="/images/travel/2025-Bologna/bologna-ricotta.jpg" %}

Once the fresh cheese has been retrieved and sat a while, it gets put into a
metal container to wait a little while. Then comes a few weeks in a salt bath
(not pictured here) before the long wait.

{% include image.html caption="New wheels before heading to aging" url="/images/travel/2025-Bologna/bologna-parm-wheeling.jpg" %}

The factory includes a large space with row after row of shelves, running up
several person heights towards the ceiling. Here the cheeses age anywhere from
12 to 36 months before they are ready.

{% include image.html caption="Fresh on the shelves" url="/images/travel/2025-Bologna/bologna-parm-waiting.jpg" %}
{% include image.html caption="Older entries, still aging" url="/images/travel/2025-Bologna/bologna-parm-waiting-more.jpg" %}

Things don't always go to plan for every wheel. You can see some of them puffing
which indicates something went off in the fermentation that gives Parmesan its
unique flavor. Other wheels show cracking or other problems. The wheels are
frequently checked with a little hammer, the sound enough to tell the master
cheese makers what's up inside the rind.

{% include image.html caption="Something's wrong here" url="/images/travel/2025-Bologna/bologna-parm-puffin.jpg" %}
{% include image.html caption="Crackin' up" url="/images/travel/2025-Bologna/bologna-parm-cracked.jpg" %}

Our next DOP item was on a private estate where they made real balsamic. I
wasn't fully aware, but nothing I'd ever had, either in Europe or in the US was
the traditional thing. The aging process for traditional balsamic is laborious,
with the end product taking either 12 or 25 years, minimum to be ready.

Not that long in the past, this product was only available in the region, and
traded or gifted between families. Only late in the last century did they begin
to expand production enough to be able to see some of it at a rather high price
point.

The process starts from grapes grown either on the estate or nearby. The juice
is squeezed and cooked before being ready to go into the barrels for aging. The
balsamic is aged in the highest floor of the house, the room packed with
barrels. It's important for the development that it be hot there in summer --
and it was! -- and cold in winter. The balsamic needs to breathe. Each line of
barrels is where the vinegar progresses through it's aging process. Once a year
they move liquid from the bigger barrels to the smaller.

{% include image.html caption="Balsamic lines" url="/images/travel/2025-Bologna/bologna-balsalmic-lineup.jpg" %}

The oldest line at the place we visited was started in 1888 and has been in
continual use since. While the barrel leaks a little, they don't mess with it
for fear of screwing up the magic.

{% include image.html caption="The oldest line, started 1888" url="/images/travel/2025-Bologna/bologna-balsalmic-1888-close.jpg" %}

The final product has to pass inspections that only allow through 1/5 of the
candidates, even from the very rarefied set of families that are in the
business. A meal was served after this tour, with free access to bottles of
their product. Quite a genius selling device that. We bought home two tiny
bottles for a hefty price.

{% include image.html caption="A real Lamborghini" url="/images/travel/2025-Bologna/bologna-lambo.jpg" %}

The last visit was to a place that makes prosciutto. As big fans of jamon, it
was interesting to watch how this was done and contrast and compare the flavors
of the product. There were a lot of cold rooms here, and a lot of places where
they were aging varying grades of product, often with differing colors to the
fats they use to seal it and different stamps depending on quality.

{% include image.html caption="So much meat" url="/images/travel/2025-Bologna/bologna-prosciutto.jpg" %}

Heresy to the Italians but I still appreciate the funk of the Spanish style
cured pork legs better, but I have a deeper appreciation for the time and care
that goes into prosciutto after the tour.

## Eats

Needless to say, eating in Bologna was also a highlight, even when we weren't
in a class making it ourselves.

The first night we rocked out with reservations set up to just see what we could
do at a couple spots that were recommended near our apartment. The first place
we tried it was a really weird interaction -- they said they didn't have any,
but then were having conversations with other folks who plainly didn't have a
reservation right beside us.

We wandered off and found another spot that looked busy and had a small cluster
of people lined up that when we asked apparently were those without
reservations. Since it looked short enough we joined the queue. The food was
okay, though the pasta a little more al dente than I expected. We tried a fried
zucchini blossom but it mostly tasted of cheese and the batter. The waiter
switched between vigorous Italian and a shockingly British accent as people
constantly maneuvered in and out.

{% include youtube.html shortcode="cLiQQsAP0EA" caption="Rolling pasta" %}

We learned our lesson there and did better research and reservations for most of
the later nights. The exception was [Simoni
Salumeria](https://salumeriasimoni.it/), which as more of a deli sort of place
we took a chance on to great success. Lovely charcuterie and cheese options with
perfect bread beside. I learned there to appreciate the mortadella, which I'd
always viewed a little suspiciously as too much like baloney to be that good. I
was wrong. Completely wrong. It's luscious and fully deserves its standing in
the meat counter.

At a recommendation from one of our guides/teachers, we got a reservation at
[Vicolo Colombiana](https://www.vicolocolombina.it/). Tucked down a tiny street
after which its named, we got an early slot easily which worked great for us.
Here we had tortellini in brodo di cappone, perfect little pastas in a savory
broth, and guancia di manzo, beef cheeks so wonderfully tender.

Another favorite was [Trattoria da Me](https://www.trattoriadame.it/). I was
expecting this for some reason to be a super traditional spot, but it turned out
to be a very modern take on the cuisine. The waiter was boisterous and friendly,
lighting up the room whenever he came in and full of suggestions. Here we tried
again with the zucchini flowers and unlike our first night _now_ I get the
allure, the subtle flavors and textures of it. The waiter was extremely excited
for us that they had the lasagna, which was normally only on Sundays, so we
obviously had to go for that. We also did the rabbit and a side of fresh
tomatoes that sang of summer. Truly an awesome meal.

And of course we can't talk about food in Italy without Amber's favorite,
gelato. One of our spots in Portland is a gelato place run by an immigrant from
Italy, so it was a thrill to go back to the source. I can't give you the
blow-by-blow because of how many times we would stop in for a little frozen
treat. Whether on the way to an activity, or just popping out at 10pm across the
plaza by our apartment, sweetness was never far away.

{% include image.html caption="Gelato" url="/images/travel/2025-Bologna/bologna-gelato-1.jpg" %}
{% include image.html caption="More gelato" url="/images/travel/2025-Bologna/bologna-gelato-2.jpg" %}

## About Town

Bologna is a beautiful city. I honestly wasn't too sure what we were going to do
there, but it proved to be a perfect introduction to Italy for us. One of the
most recognizable sights in the city were a pair of towers -- one of them
significantly leaning, take that Pisa! -- and it was only a few blocks down the
street from the apartment Amber found for us.

{% include image.html caption="Garisenda and Asinelli -- Bologna's two towers" url="/images/travel/2025-Bologna/bologna-towers.jpg" %}

The city is very walkable near the center, and its architecture was a joy to
explore. In Athens there were many landmarks which made an impression but the
overall sense of the city apart from those spots was "generic European" to me.
In Bologna on the other hand, there was an immediate sense that you were in
Italy, similar to how you could land me in any corner of Barcelona and I'd know
where I was.

A key component of that feeling of place was how the walkways and paths were
built, the arching covered paths that you took from place to place.

{% include image.html caption="Arched walkways" url="/images/travel/2025-Bologna/bologna-walkway-arches.jpg" %}
{% include image.html caption="More arches" url="/images/travel/2025-Bologna/bologna-walkway.jpg" %}

So much of the city was clearly built before the advent of cars. The narrow
ways, the cobbled stones, the sense of winding your way through a maze made even
the walk with Google maps to a restaurant something of an adventure.

{% include image.html caption="Delightful little sidestreets" url="/images/travel/2025-Bologna/bologna-walkway-motos.jpg" %}
{% include image.html caption="Shade down the way" url="/images/travel/2025-Bologna/bologna-walkway-shaded.jpg" %}

A fun little side note, at least in downtown Bologna, pertains to the various
grocery stores that we visited. Where normally stores of that sort are some sort
of large open space, everywhere we went instead we found the places where it was
obvious that the store had been carved out by connecting multiple different
distinct spaces, what had previously been multiple shops or apartments or
something, now all strung together in a winding maze. It made hunting for
supplies extra adventurous, as you never knew what the next room would hold.

{% include image.html caption="I'm not lion to you" url="/images/travel/2025-Bologna/bologna-lion-fence.jpg" %}

Our days were often shaped around the excursions and classes we were taking, but
there was a heatwave on which also sapped the energy out of us much of the time.
Most days followed a pattern of waking, doing an activity, then crashing at the
apartment in the hottest part of the afternoon, maybe even napping, before
emerging to dinner in the evening. Rough life.

We did some shopping in the city. An outpost of the sporting goods store
Decathlon, which we frequented in Barcelona, was around and Asher dearly missed
some of the swim trunks we'd gotten him there. Unfortunately it turned out to be
a tiny one in Bologna, but we had better success finding one of the outskirts
when we left town.

Amber's other obsession was to get some supplies for making pasta at home. We
went to several locations looking for the "right" type of rolling pin like we'd
seen in our classes. It took us eventually to a kind of cluttered, bazaar-like
shop with narrow walkways down the aisles that two people could barely pass by,
but we found the roller she was after. A chitarra proved impossible to find
oddly enough, so Amazon it was.

Last but not least, at the balsamic place the meal had ended with an aperitif of
homemade liquor aged on walnuts called nocino. I enjoyed it enough that we
started asking after it at a few wine spots around, and while what we found
wasn't nearly as good but was worth taking home.

We saw two other major sights in Bologna. One was the Basilica di San Petronio,
a church bordering one of the plazas near our apartment with only part of the
front face finished. Legend has it that the Pope of the time wasn't too happy
with it approaching the size and majesty of some other cathedrals, so he put a
halt to the project and it remains unfinished to this day.

{% include image.html caption="Outside the Basilica" url="/images/travel/2025-Bologna/bologna-basilica.jpg" %}
{% include image.html caption="Inside the Basilica" url="/images/travel/2025-Bologna/bologna-basilica-interior.jpg" %}

In a room off the main space of the cathedral were a series of really cool
looking old choir books. These volumes were huge to be visible to folks from a
distance while reading them to sing during services. Even so, the margins were
decorated lavishly.

{% include image.html caption="Choir book at the Basilica" url="/images/travel/2025-Bologna/bologna-choir-book.jpg" %}

It was a constant amazement too, throughout Bologna, all the little touches
where things were decorated and gilded, painted and finished in style. The level
of detail was so far past what I'm used to in the States, it's really hard to
imagine the world in which the work was done.

{% include image.html caption="Such fancy decorations" url="/images/travel/2025-Bologna/bologna-fancy.jpg" %}
{% include image.html caption="Even the ceilings are fancy" url="/images/travel/2025-Bologna/bologna-fancy-ceilings.jpg" %}

The other big destination in Bologna was a set of sculptures of various figures
from the Gospels, grieving over the dead Christ. Apparently these terracotta
figures may have been painted and arranged different back in the day, but the
exquisite way in which their emotions were captured was moving to see.

{% include image.html caption="Some screaming" url="/images/travel/2025-Bologna/bologna-scream-1.jpg" %}
{% include image.html caption="More screaming" url="/images/travel/2025-Bologna/bologna-scream-2.jpg" %}
{% include image.html caption="SO MUCH SCREAMING" url="/images/travel/2025-Bologna/bologna-scream-3.jpg" %}

Our apartment was right across from the Piazza del Nettuno. As the name
suggests, this plaza featured a massive statue of the god Neptune.

{% include image.html caption="Neptune in the Plaza" url="/images/travel/2025-Bologna/bologna-neptune.jpg" %}

Our cooking instructor Maruizio told us a story about this statue, though. The
legend is that the artist originally wanted Neptune's, well, manliness, to be
rather more in keeping with his stature as a god. His patrons, though, refused
and so Neptune was crafted in more modest proportions.

The artist, however, got his revenge. If you stand at just the right angle
behind the statue, Neptune's outstretched hand... well, look and see for
yourself.

{% include image.html caption="What the artist intended" url="/images/travel/2025-Bologna/bologna-neptune-sculptors-revenge.jpg" %}

In the States at least, we often view the past as being some more tame and bland
time. I believe the facts of the matter are quite different than that
impression.

{% include image.html caption="Ahem" url="/images/travel/2025-Bologna/bologna-neptunes-gals.jpg" %}

<br />

**What I read along the way**

* _Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction_ - Various
* _The Great When_ - Alan Moore
* _Smiley's People_ - John le Carré
