---
title: "Europe 2025: Siena"
date: 2025-08-14
categories: travel
tags:
- siena
- food
- cycling
---

## Retiring to Sienna

For the final destination in our trip, we decided to take a car. In part this
was to be able to enjoy the lovely Italian countryside, but also so we could
maintain control of our own schedule when it came to the return trip. It would
have been a couple hours by train, and the prospect of doing that with a flight
schedule to keep was something neither of us wanted.

With our additional luggage, the tiny car that we'd originally slated to rent
just wasn't going to cut it. Even with an upgrade we had to keep one of the bags
in the back seat. They bumped us up, though, to a nice BMW. It had lots of fancy
lighting and unlike our rental on Crete the navigation system synced up properly
which was a blessing.

{% include image.html caption="BMW" url="/images/travel/2025-Siena/siena-bmw.jpg" %}

The drive from Bologna to Siena was lovely, with all the hills, small towns,
church spires and vineyards you'd expect. There were also a surprising number of
long tunnels cutting through the hills.

{% include image.html caption="🎶 Secret tunnel 🎶" url="/images/travel/2025-Siena/siena-secret-tunnel.jpg" %}

Our place in Siena was called [Siena Hills
Apartments](https://www.sienahillsapartments.com/en/index). Even with a stop at
a full-sized Decathlon on the outskirts of Bologna, we were early for check-in.
The folks at the desk encouraged us to just wait downstairs at the restaurant
and bar.

{% include image.html caption="Siena skyline" url="/images/travel/2025-Siena/siena-skyline.jpg" %}

We took the elevator down and followed the signs to what was plainly more of a
dining room than a restaurant. The only bar was a counter along the length of
the room with three bottles of liquor behind it. Even stranger, everyone sitting
at the tables in the early afternoon looked to be at least thirty years older
than we were... and they were staring at us. It honestly felt like we'd wandered
into an old folks home and were the most interesting thing that'd happened there
in an age.

Amber noticed as we'd descended some other branding on the signs in addition to
the Siena Hills Apartments. A quick web search explained all -- apparently the
facility was retirement community, but since it wasn't entirely full out they
rented out the remaining rooms for travelers.

## Cycling the Hills of Tuscany

The entire reason for us going to Siena, though, apart from the good things we'd
heard from my brother and sister-in-law, was a special treat for me. We'd
originally been talking about going to the Dolomites which get rave reviews
online, but the mountains are really about hiking which is neither of our jam.
Then Amber had the brainwave -- what if I wanted to bike in Italy. A little
searching and emailing turned up a private guide for the one full day we had to
be in Siena, perfecto!


The meeting point was a bike shop called [Siena Velo.](https://sienavelo.it/en/)
We arrived a little bit early, and Amber dropped me off, parking in the
neighborhood being a hassle. I wandered into the shop where it was very evident
that the guy running the shop spoke as much English as I did Italian. He managed
to convey that my guide would be along, though.

{% include image.html caption="Siena Velo" url="/images/travel/2025-Siena/siena-cycling-shop.jpg" %}
{% include image.html caption="Smile, you're biking!" url="/images/travel/2025-Siena/siena-cycling-shop-smile.jpg" %}

My guide showed up not long later. Francesco was one of those people you look at
and know immediately that they cycle. He had that triangular frame, wide
shoulders, wiry strong legs. At some point fairly early on I asked how much
biking he did. It turned out he was semi-professional rider.

"What's that mean specifically, semi-professional?" I asked.

"You train like the professionals, you just don't get paid yet."

I, as the kids say these days, was cooked.

We started in the city and had about five kilometers to ride until we hit the
real countryside. It started off fine, with me keeping a reasonable pace even
with a fair amount of hills.

{% include image.html caption="Tuscan castles in the distance" url="/images/travel/2025-Siena/siena-cycling-castle.jpg" %}
{% include image.html caption="The smiles are fake but the fun is real" url="/images/travel/2025-Siena/siena-cycling-fake-smiles.jpg" %}

The Chianti region was so gorgeous to ride through. Vineyards and farms were
everywhere, down little winding roads, behind hedges. Often the farmhouses were
built up right to the edge of the roads, as if they'd been constructed before
there had been much motor traffic on the roads.

{% include image.html caption="The vineyards" url="/images/travel/2025-Siena/siena-cycling-vineyards-2.jpg" %}
{% include image.html caption="Me and the vineyards" url="/images/travel/2025-Siena/siena-cycling-vineyards.jpg" %}

We took a break at a local spot and had some cola and cold water. Not pedaling
it was easier to have some good discussion. We talked about school -- Francesco
is going to college in economics -- and many other topics.

{% include image.html caption="Breaking for local cola" url="/images/travel/2025-Siena/siena-cycling-cola-break.jpg" %}

Past the halfway point, I'll be honest, I was struggling. In the initial
messages I'd confidently said I could comfortably ride up to 60 kilometers
(about 40 miles) and that was true. But the description of Chianti as "rolling
hills" was _not_ what I thought of as rollers. These climbs were intense and
long. The roads were windy, so most of the time you couldn't see to the top. It
would seem like the segment you were on would top out when you just reached the
turn, only to be cruelly betrayed as the climb continued.

But those downhills were exhilarating. Zooming down as fast as I was willing to
go, the wind cooling me off from the growing intensity of the sun, the scenery
flying by. It was awesome and made the pain worth it.

Lunch was at [Agricola Fabbrini](https://www.chianinafabbrini.it/), basically a
small farm that served lunch. The meal was pitch perfect for that point in the
ride, with nothing too heavy but lots of flavor (and water). There was a
panzanella very like what we make at home, cured meats, and a light frittata.
Wine they made on site was available, though I only had a little bit given the
remainder of the ride still before me.

{% include image.html caption="Agricola Fabbrini" url="/images/travel/2025-Siena/siena-cycling-lunch-agricola.jpg" %}
{% include image.html caption="Homemade after meal wine" url="/images/travel/2025-Siena/siena-cycling-lunch-vino.jpg" %}

They toured us around the farm briefly after we had eaten. We got to see their
cattle -- much fewer than they used to have apparently. The dining room had
pictures of their prize winning bulls from years past. It was so fun to see, and
you could hear their pride in the heritage of the farm as they showed us the
various fields they owned and how far they ran.

{% include image.html caption="A young calf" url="/images/travel/2025-Siena/siena-cycling-lunch-calf.jpg" %}
{% include image.html caption="Prize winning cattle" url="/images/travel/2025-Siena/siena-cycling-lunch-winner.jpg" %}

There were also chickens, lovely little flower gardens, and as we mounted up to
ride off ripe fig trees.

{% include image.html caption="Figs warmed by the sun" url="/images/travel/2025-Siena/siena-cycling-fig.jpg" %}

The last stretch of the ride was the shortest, but my legs were really hurting
by then. In the earlier parts I could slow down a little or take a brief pause
and then bounce back. By this stage, the pain in my quads was making it hard to
just keep moving at all.

My guide would zip out ahead, often out of sight, then turn back to encourage me
when I'd lagged long enough. "Let's go, let's go!" I can still hear him chanting
as he pulled away from me as if we were on flat ground.

Thinking of the ride even now brings a warm smile to my face. Truly a highlight
of the trip, and such a caring and thoughtful gift of Amber to come up with it!

{% include image.html caption="'You want the bike? Now pedal!'" url="/images/travel/2025-Siena/siena-cycling-go-ride-a-bike.jpg" %}

I wonder what Amber got up to while I was riding?

{% include image.html caption="What Amber did instead" url="/images/travel/2025-Siena/siena-gelato.jpg" %}

## Refreshing Sienna

The ~~retirement home~~ apartments did have a pool, and we got some good time
lounging out by it over the couple of days we were in Siena. At one point I
decided I should take advantage of the "bar" such as it was. They had a brief
drink list so I picked a negroni. It was brought out by a nervous looking young
staffer.

"It's the first one I've ever made. Tell me if I did it right?"

Thankfully for both him and me, his instructions must have been good because it
was a nice mix of bitter and sweet, icy cold and perfect for the poolside.

Our nicest meal was at [Al Tocco](https://www.facebook.com/AlToccoBarHostaria/)
where we ordered Florentine steak, a massive thick cut served upright. For pasta
along with we had the pico pecorino, which was done just right.

Hilariously, an American couple at the next table over from us was ordering
after dinner coffee and asked for a cappuccino. The waitress' dismay was visible
to us, and we chuckled, being in on the "secret" knowledge that Italians will
normally make no secret at all that cappuccino is only for the morning. You
cannot have it after lunch, let alone after dinner!

## About Sienna

Okay, so I do actually know what Amber did while I was biking. She parked the
car carefully, and walked into Siena to see the place before we did our big
visit the next day. The care in parking was called for because of what's known
as the ZTLs -- Zona a Traffico Limitato -- where driving is prohibited in
certain areas. Siena was known to have these, and they are not well marked much
of the time. Amber was nervous the whole time driving in Italy because of the
horror stories she'd heard of folks getting 300 euro tickets in the mail months
after a trip because a camera caught them.

{% include image.html caption="Steep streets in Siena" url="/images/travel/2025-Siena/siena-steep-streets.jpg" %}

It turned out that we had timed our visit for some sort of city-wide festival.
Amber found them setting up for the evening activities, with long tables running
down the streets where folks would be dining later. Even by the time she left
later in the afternoon, though, parking was a nightmare so between that and my
exhausted frame we didn't venture back.

{% include image.html caption="Tables ready to party" url="/images/travel/2025-Siena/siena-festival-tables.jpg" %}

Different neighborhoods of Siena all have their own flags and symbolic animal.
This was on full display with flags and costumes.

{% include image.html caption="Neighborhood flags" url="/images/travel/2025-Siena/siena-festival-flags-2.jpg" %}
{% include image.html caption="More flags" url="/images/travel/2025-Siena/siena-festival-flags-3.jpg" %}
{% include image.html caption="Yet more flags" url="/images/travel/2025-Siena/siena-festival-neighborhood-flag.jpg" %}

The next day when we did come back for our entry to Il Duomo, things were still
happening. We managed to catch a small parade, complete with song which echoed
down the narrow stony streets.

{% include youtube.html shortcode="NqgDqFiKVpk" caption="Festival parade in Sienna" %}
{% include youtube.html shortcode="llPhJzMktBI" caption="Singing in the square" %}

## Il Duomo

A long walk uphill from the nearest parking was the big sight to see in Siena --
a medieval cathedral called Il Duomo.

{% include image.html caption="Il Duomo" url="/images/travel/2025-Siena/siena-il-duomo-exterior.jpg" %}
{% include image.html caption="Images in the entryway" url="/images/travel/2025-Siena/siena-il-duomo-entry-floor.jpg" %}
{% include image.html caption="Big old doors" url="/images/travel/2025-Siena/siena-il-duomo-door.jpg" %}

Like many of the grand places in Europe, it was timed entry. We lined up in the
already streaming sunshine with all the other tourists and waited our turn. I
was slightly nervous that my shorts would be a problem -- we'd heard of such
requirements before but forgot the day of -- but thankfully I wasn't given a bag
to cover my shameful knees.

{% include image.html caption="Il Duomo stripes" url="/images/travel/2025-Siena/siena-il-duomo-stripes.jpg" %}
{% include image.html caption="Stripes and ceiling" url="/images/travel/2025-Siena/siena-il-duomo-ceiling-2.jpg" %}

The interior had a really interesting striped pattern, with dark black lines
running horizontal everywhere. The effect was very bold, making the space far
more dynamic than many churches I've seen.

{% include image.html caption="Looking up" url="/images/travel/2025-Siena/siena-il-duomo-ceiling.jpg" %}
{% include image.html caption="More choir books" url="/images/travel/2025-Siena/siena-il-duomo-choir-book.jpg" %}
{% include image.html caption="The choir library" url="/images/travel/2025-Siena/siena-il-duomo-library.jpg" %}

It's hard to really describe in detail how intricate and beautiful such spaces
are. So much goes into them over so many centuries, it's hard to do it justice.

{% include image.html caption="Paintings in Il Duomo" url="/images/travel/2025-Siena/siena-il-duomo-paintings.jpg" %}
{% include image.html caption="The pulpit" url="/images/travel/2025-Siena/siena-il-duomo-pulpit.jpg" %}
{% include image.html caption="Statues in the museum" url="/images/travel/2025-Siena/siena-il-duomo-statues.jpg" %}
{% include image.html caption="Heads of saints (?) watching" url="/images/travel/2025-Siena/siena-il-duomo-watching-you.jpg" %}
{% include image.html caption="It's us" url="/images/travel/2025-Siena/siena-il-duomo.jpg" %}

Across the court was a museum which had many additional objects and rooms. Amber
didn't follow up the stairs more than a level or two, already hurting from her
tromping around the day before.

{% include image.html caption="Books in the museum" url="/images/travel/2025-Siena/siena-il-duomo-books.jpg" %}

Among the features of the museum, though, was that from the top floor you could
get out onto a narrow walkway and see amazing views across Siena.

{% include image.html caption="View from the top" url="/images/travel/2025-Siena/siena-il-duomo-courtyard.jpg" %}
{% include image.html caption="Il Duomo in panorama" width="800px" url="/images/travel/2025-Siena/siena-il-duomo-pano-2.jpg" %}
{% include image.html caption="The rest of Siena" width="800px" url="/images/travel/2025-Siena/siena-il-duomo-pano-1.jpg" %}
{% include image.html caption="The climb back down from the panorama" url="/images/travel/2025-Siena/siena-il-duomo-stairs.jpg" %}

## Backtracking

After our tour of Il Duomo, it was time for us to head back to Bologna and begin
the return trip home.

{% include image.html caption="Bags packed to go" url="/images/travel/2025-Siena/siena-ready-to-go.jpg" %}

Along the highway, we stopped at a roadside spot for some food, except it wasn't
on the side -- it spanned the whole highway! This seemed novel, but it was
absolutely packed with angry fussy travelers (ourselves soon contributing to
that number) so we grabbed our food and spit as fast as we could.

Our return flight to the US was from Athens, so we took another bus in the sky
"courtesy" of Ryanair from Bologna back to Athens. Amber had picked out a little
bed and breakfast calls the [St Thomas B&B](https://www.stay-in-athens.com/). We
arrived late, but one of the draws of the place was that it was very close to
the airport but also walking distance from a taverna.

The host had been told we needed an early departure, and ordered us a taxi and
had breakfast already prepared and in our room fridge since we would be gone
before the normal meal began. He had sad news, though, when we made to head out
to the taverna. Apparently it was closed because it was August. We ended up
picking at some of the breakfast items a little early and just going to bed.

Getting the extra bag added turned out to be a hassle because our tickets were
with Air Canada, but the first leg was Swiss Air instead. Sharing no systems, we
had to walk to a separate desk where someone called up Air Canada to get things
settled. Thankfully for once lines weren't enormous, so our problem didn't slow
anyone else down and we were there in plenty of time.

There was, though, one leg of the journey we were concerned with. In Zurich, we
had only 55 minutes from landing to the long flight to Vancouver leaving. We
talked to the staff and there wasn't much to be done. "If it let you book it, it
should be possible."

We got off the plane as promptly as we could in Zurich and literally ran through
the airport. With great relief, when we turned the corner to where the gate was,
we found enormous lines still waiting. We joined a first line that was doing
passport checking, and by the time we got through that the boarding line hadn't
even drained entirely.

The rest of the trip went smoothly, and Cora picked us up at the airport. Such
an amazing time, and a fun look forward to what life might be like for us when
the kids have moved out.
