---
title: "Europe 2025: Athens"
date: 2025-07-31
categories: travel
tags:
- athens
- food
---

After more than a decade, Amber and I were finally getting the chance for a long
trip without the kids.

## Getting To Athens

Our first major destination was
[Crete](/travel/2025/08/03/europe-2025-crete/), where we'd be attending
[JCrete](https://www.jcrete.org/). But one does not get to Crete direct from the
west coast of the United States. First stop, Athens.

We'd booked with Air Canada, which I'd traveled on before relatively happily.
Not too many weeks before the departure date, though, they cancelled a leg of
our flight. We had scheduled our classic super-duper early morning departure,
but when Amber scrambled on the computer to reschedule she ended up finding
something mid-afternoon our original departure day. It ended up losing a partial
day in Athens, which will be pertinent later, but was so much more comfortable.

{% include image.html caption="How I feel about early flights" url="/images/travel/2025-Athens/athens-street-art-1.jpg" %}

The Portland Airport had some major renovations since the last time we'd been
through. The rather narrow check-in area had been knocked way back, making room
for a spacious modern layout underneath a ceiling of light wooden shapes that
felt very Portland. The drop-off had another major new aspect too -- Cora
drove us up and dropped us off, as she was staying at home for the duration.
Asher had already left the day before and would be splitting time between
the grandparents, leaving Cora solo. It was such an odd feeling for my
daughter to be doing something so, well, grown up, but the time had come.

The trip itself was uneventful, as one hopes for with air travel. Our route went
Portland, Vancouver, Munich, Athens. The only minor hitch was in Munich where we
had to go through passport control. Beyond the stations where documents were
checked was a glassed in area with some doors marked plainly as "exit only" with
lots of red and signs. Yet apparently someone had decided after walking through
to turn back around and come _back_ through the doors. This set off alarms, and
everyone in the intervening space had to stand around in the shrill, piercing
noise for about fifteen minutes until some incomprehensible protocol had been
followed releasing us.

With the late departure we got into Athens relatively late. A cab dropped us
downtown at our hotel, the Skylark. The air was thick and humid as we got our
luggage from the back. The hotel was definitely hipster tinged, mostly in ways
that made us Portlanders feel right at home.

{% include image.html caption="Lighting, curtsey of BIRD" url="/images/travel/2025-Athens/athens-twee-1.jpg" %}

The only off note in the hotel environment was in the elevator. It had a full
screen in the ceiling with a fancy purple geometric animation running in a loop,
and played an annoying dance beat. While the music itself grated a little, _it
stopped the music every time the doors opened before resuming at the same spot._
Any sense of rhythm was entirely lost but hey, folks heading up to the "club" on
the top floor might have enjoyed it.

{% include image.html caption="Gotta hand it to them" url="/images/travel/2025-Athens/athens-twee-807.jpg" %}

After we checked in it wasn't quite late enough to collapse. We keep a firm
policy of staying up until 9PM to start kicking the jet lag when travelling. We
found a little gyro spot around the corner, got the first of many Greek salads
with some fries but failed to order the meat we'd expected. We were so tired
that we didn't bother fixing it and just ate up before heading upstairs to bed.

{% include image.html caption="Did you bring your antlers?" url="/images/travel/2025-Athens/athens-twee-2.jpg" %}

## National Archaeological Museum

The breakfast included with the hotel was rather nice, so we enjoyed the morning
dining on the many pickled treats, Greek yogurt, and strong coffee. Our plan for
the day was to go to the [National Archaeological
Museum](https://www.namuseum.gr/), one of the major places to see in Athens
apart from, you know, the Parthenon and all that.

I haven't studied Greek history a ton, so the museum was very revealing about
the many many different eras and regions that we think of now as Greece. The
museum had many spacious, open rooms with statuary, leading off then to smaller
rooms off to the sides with glassed in cases showing off the antiquities.

{% include image.html caption="Aphrodite giving Pan the chancla" url="/images/travel/2025-Athens/athens-chancla.jpg" %}

An interesting point to me in looking at all those objects was the wide variety
in their quality. Some things were so incredibly intricately crafted, a wonder
to look at, clearly something from a different age. Then other items, while so
old, honestly looked a bit like you could find them at the Portland Saturday
Market without them being out of place.

{% include image.html caption="Ancient jewelry you could imagine buying" url="/images/travel/2025-Athens/athens-bead-faire.jpg" %}

And then there were a few bits that, well, I'm not much of an artist but judge
for yourself.

{% include image.html caption="Art?" url="/images/travel/2025-Athens/athens-derp-art-2.jpg" %}

Another oddity was coming upon various things which looked strangely modern,
often for reasons that the creator would have had no clue about. For instance,
one of the statues, I think maybe of one of the Furies, really just reminded me
of some old witch from a Studio Ghibli movie.

{% include image.html caption="Looks like something from a Ghibli movie" url="/images/travel/2025-Athens/athens-ghibli-face.jpg" %}

And ancient people weren't above enjoying a little cuteness in their days
either.

{% include image.html caption="This hedgehog is chill instead of fast" url="/images/travel/2025-Athens/athens-hedgehog.jpg" %}

Having said that, there were some spectacular pieces. The statues were often so
lifelike and flowing it was hard to believe they were made of stone. And then
down in an open courtyard by the cafe was a fabulous mosaic of the Medusa. The
fine detail -- and the fact it had held up through all of those years -- was
amazing to see.

{% include image.html caption="Medusa Mosaic" url="/images/travel/2025-Athens/athens-medusa-mosaic.jpg" %}

Overall, it was a solid museum I would highly recommend for anyone making it
through Athens.

{% include image.html caption="Got your nose!" url="/images/travel/2025-Athens/athens-got-your-nose.jpg" %}

After the museum, we set out on a quest. You see, every year the Holy Trinity
Greek Orthodox Cathedral in Portland throws a [Greek
Festival](https://www.portlandgreekfestival.com/), and one of Amber's favorite
things is a dessert item they serve there called loukoumades. These lovely
little fried dough balls, coated in honey and cinnamon, are a yearly treat. It
seemed like a miss to come to Greece and not see how the "real thing" stacked
up. A little web sleuthing turned up a couple possible locations. The most
traditional option,
[Krinos](https://www.facebook.com/pages/%CE%9A%CF%81%CE%AF%CE%BD%CE%BF%CF%82-%CE%9B%CE%BF%CF%85%CE%BA%CE%BF%CF%85%CE%BC%CE%B1%CE%B4%CE%B5%CF%82/389168741130827),
was a short walk away so we headed out.

{% include image.html caption="Loukoumades from Krinos" url="/images/travel/2025-Athens/athens-krinos.jpg" %}

We went in with some nerves. Were we in love with a fake, Americanized version
of the treat? But the answer was a resounding "no!" Krinos' loukoumades came in
a slightly different shape -- circular rather than the donut hole style we were
familiar with -- but the light crispiness, the perfect sticky sweetness of the
honey, the dash of cinnamon all hit just right.

On the walk back to the hotel we passed a shop with tables out on the sidewalk
selling spices. We almost went by, then Amber paused. The salesman started
offering advice, asking questions, and in general pulling us in like fish on a
hook. By the time we left he'd managed to sell us several different local spices
and a couple varieties of local honey -- one of Amber's hobby items to gather
when traveling.

Dinner that night was at
[Karamanlidika](https://www.karamanlidika.gr/language/en/). We didn't get
reservations set, and when we arrived we found the corner of the brick building
surrounded by quite a few people. We asked and mostly they were without
reservations too, and bit by bit folks were being let inside so we lined up.

{% include image.html caption="Tasty Karamanlidika" url="/images/travel/2025-Athens/athens-karamanlidika.jpg" %}

I'm glad we did. The place was effectively a restaurant attached with an awesome
deli. We had a number of classics -- fava bean "salad" that was more of a paste
but delicious, another typical but delicious Greek salad, lamb meatballs,
anchovies in white vinegar and of course a massive charcuterie plate. It's a
deli after all! A lovely red wine to top it off, and we were rolling when we
left.

But of course, one cannot just have dinner when traveling. What about dessert?
Another of the loukoumades places -- called
[Lukumades](https://www.lukumades.com/) wasn't too far away, so we walked off
some of the meal and joined the evening throng down the narrow streets.

{% include image.html caption="Lukumades, new school" url="/images/travel/2025-Athens/athens-hipster-loukoumades.jpg" %}

Where Krinos, which had been open since the 1920s, represented tradition, this
place was all about remixing the classics. You want your loukoumades with filled
with chocolate or pistachio? Dipped in some sort of frosting? Served with
gelato? Savory instead of sweet with goat cheese? You got it buddy! It was like
the Salt and Straw of loukoumades.

Overall I've got to say that it wasn't as good as the originals. However, the
same chain did have an outpost at the airport and hey, even not-the-best
loukoumades are still loukoumades!

{% include image.html caption="Howdy" url="/images/travel/2025-Athens/athens-street-art-2.jpg" %}

## Roman Agora and Out

One part of our time in Athens was a failure. We lost most of a day getting
there with the flight re-arrangements, and we didn't realize that the entry to
the Parthenon and Acropolis were time-ticketed events. Finally researching when
we were in town, we found that there just wasn't a reasonable time for us to
make it to these iconic locations. At least we could see them from a distance.

{% include image.html caption="Acropolis in the distance" url="/images/travel/2025-Athens/athens-distant-acropolis.jpg" %}

Fortunately, Athens has more ruins than just the Parthenon. And in fact, many of
them don't entail hours standing in line, in the hottest part of the day,
while climbing huge stairs.

Our chosen backup was the Roman Agora. We didn't get out of the hotel in a
hurry, so it was still very hot near the middle of the day by the time we
approached. Following Google maps, we popped to the edge of the site, only to
find that the highlighted entrance was closed. It wasn't obvious at all which
way to go, so we picked a direction and started circling around to try and find
an entrance. Of course, we picked the wrong way, ending up circling 3/4 of the
rather large area before getting, sweaty and already tired, to the entrance.

{% include image.html caption="Sunshine at the Agora" url="/images/travel/2025-Athens/athens-agora.jpg" %}

The Agora was beautiful, large with columns climbing up into the sky that really
caught a sense of majesty. It's amazing to think that those were built so many
thousands of years ago and still stand.

{% include image.html caption="The long view near the Roman Agora" url="/images/travel/2025-Athens/athens-agora-long.jpg" %}

We made a relatively brief tour of the museum that was there -- we were fast
approaching the "oh, more old stuff" point in viewing archaeological relics.
Backtracking the way we'd walked to the Agora, we grabbed a cafe lunch. The fans
at the edges of the outdoor seating really sold it.

From there it was back to the hotel to check out, and a taxi to the airport.
It proved to be a frustrating check-in, as there was a whole system for people
to self-check their bags but literally no one was doing so and one single
attendant was helping everyone by pressing buttons on the self-serve screens. By
the time we got to the front we just stepped up to one of the machines and it
worked fine. No idea what the holdup was there. That tenor held throughout the
boarding process -- everyone was packed together a little too tight, and a
little fussy and angry as things were delayed. We walked out through the
punishing heat, though, boarded the plane and were on our way to the next
stop, [Crete!](/travel/2025/08/03/europe-2025-crete/)

<br />

**What I read along the way**

* _And Then There Were None_ - Agatha Christie
* _The Living Mountain: A Celebration of the Cairngorm Mountains of Scotland_ - Nan Shepherd
* _Interior Chinatown_ - Charles Yu
* _What Moves the Dead_ - T. Kingfisher
