---
title: "Europe 2025: Crete"
date: 2025-08-03
categories: travel
tags:
- crete
- jcrete
- java
- friends
- food
---

## Transport and Accommodations

We landed at Chania International Airport, a small place but not surprisingly
so. I mean, Crete's an island after all, how big of a need was there for
airports? We grabbed our rental car just outside the terminal, briefly tried to
get the navigation working, but were foiled by "Attaching with USB and starting
your navigation app." We settled on me holding up the iPhone while Google maps
did its thing and got on our way.

An oddity we noticed during the half hour drive was how folks perpetually pulled
over until their cars were overlapping or even entirely in the shoulder when
there was space. Faster traffic then would buzz by in the partial lane. It took
a few minutes to realize this was the driving cultural norm, not just some weird
tentative driver ahead of us. Amber did her best to follow suit.

{% include image.html caption="Greeks using the shoulder" url="/images/travel/2025-Crete/crete-greek-driving.jpg" %}

The [JCrete](https://www.jcrete.org/) unconference which drew us to the island
was held in Kolymbari, off almost to the western tip of Crete. By the time we
entered the sleepy little seaside town it was already getting dark. The
apartment we had rented was on the furthest end of town towards the [Orthodox
Academy of Crete](https://www.oac.gr/en/) (OAC) where the unconference would be
held. Following the map, we turned up a narrow one-way street with cars parked
along it. The buildings were almost entirely unnumbered, and the map pinned a
location that very plainly _wasn't_ our apartment. We fumbled around for several
minutes, walking up and down the street until we realized that a big wooden
sliding gate we'd passed by was our entrance.

{% include image.html caption="Our rustic apartment" url="/images/travel/2025-Crete/crete-rustic-apartment.jpg" %}

The apartment was a rustic place. Behind the gate was a porch with a long table,
barbecue (which we never ended up using), an outdoor shower, and some loungers.
The walls were made of stone which kept it somewhat cool inside, although we did
kick the AC on when we were in. The living and bathrooms had plainly been
renovated not long in the past, with a nice modern flair that suited the space
well.

{% include image.html caption="Modern touches in the apartment" url="/images/travel/2025-Crete/crete-modern-touches.jpg" %}

Once we'd dropped the luggage off and gotten the apartment cooling, we trekked
out in search of dinner and groceries. There were a couple of small general
shops that we'd passed on our way in, and near them some tavernas. We picked the
one that looked least bar-like and were pleased with the tasty lamb and, you
guessed it, Greek salad. The whole place was pretty slow, and one older man was
doing all the waiting, complete with a rattling plastic cart that he used to
roll out whatever goodness he was delivering and take the dishes away.

A "feature" of the apartment that we weren't really prepared for was the
cicadas. While present almost everywhere we went in Crete, they seemed to
especially congregate on our porch. We referred to it as the "cicada sex club"
given it's popularity. Twice while we were there I wrote a little at the
otherwise wonderful outdoor table, but the noise was right on the edge of
headache-inducing so we didn't spend much other time there.

{% include youtube.html caption="Cicadas getting noisy" shortcode="aI_p4au9HbE" %}

## JCrete Day 1

The first day I woke up, ate some yogurt for breakfast, and then trooped out
past the edge of town and uphill towards the OAC where JCrete was set to begin.

{% include image.html caption="Path up to OAC" url="/images/travel/2025-Crete/crete-up-to-oac.jpg" %}

JCrete is an unconference. Unlike the traditional conferences I've attended in
the past, at an unconf there are no planned speakers, no prior agenda, lots of
healthy chaos. The day begins with people proposing sessions, which then get
voted on, and the sessions with the most votes get scheduled and happen. Adding
to the yearly chaos, the rooms were named after Norse mythology. Just what you'd
expect for an event in Greece, right?

As the "J" in JCrete suggests, the central programming topic is Java. It had
been about a year and a half since I was using much Java in my professional
context (moving from New Relic to GitHub meant trading my backend Java for Ruby,
TypeScript and a smattering of Go), but I found it was like riding a bike. I
quickly immersed, and ended up proposing a couple of sessions even that got
selected.

My session that first day was about "Surviving the AI Hype" and was a discussion
forum for folks who's roadmaps are overrun with AI features. I enjoyed the
various perspectives on how to work with the hype and not burn out, how to push
back when things don't make sense and engage where the tech fits. Other
highlights for the day included hearing about some of the new on-ramp features
to make Java easier to start with -- less ceremony for getting a program
started, no shade to `public static void main` -- and structured concurrency.

Lunches were at one each day, and partners and family, which are highly
encouraged to come along to JCrete, were welcome at that point. The food was
always an excellent variety of Greek dishes, and the conversation at the tables
lively. The first day featured an evening meal at OAC as well, which made for
easy planning. Our friends Ben and Anna arrived during the day, and we finally
caught up with them there.

The first day of JCrete being about the third day since arriving, the jetlag hit
_hard_ in the afternoon. I knew the pattern well enough to struggle through,
though, knowing that I'd feel better rested soon.

{% include image.html caption="Unconference planning" url="/images/travel/2025-Crete/crete-unconf.jpg" %}

## JCrete Day 2

The second day at JCrete brought some wonderful sessions exploring new APIs in
the JDK -- `Gatherer`s and stable variables in particular. The sessions were
often just someone interested cracking open an IDE and writing some code live to
demonstrate the newness. This was refreshing versus the usual conference polish
and prep.

{% include image.html caption="View from OAC" url="/images/travel/2025-Crete/crete-view-from-oac.jpg" %}

That afternoon one of the other attendees had mentioned that they needed a ride
to the airport. Amber and I, being who we are, gladly agreed to give them a ride
in the afternoon. Little did we know until following up that Crete has not one,
but two airports. And the flight was from the second airport, Herkalion, which
was two and a half hours drive away. At least we got a chance to see a large
part of the length of the island. In fact, we've now seen more of Crete than Ben
and Anna, who have attended the conference for years.

In the evening we ate at an Argentine seafood place down by the beach with Ben
and Anna. The beachfront road was frequented by a variety of cats who prowled
along looking for tasty treats. They hit the jackpot with our crew, who were
unable to refuse feeding a cute kitty.

## JCrete Day 3

The third day of JCrete had sessions in the afternoon instead of the morning so
folks could make an excursion to some beaches. The downside of this plan,
though, was that the approach to said beaches was an unpaved road as
specifically excluded on our rental contract. That plus the really early start
time convinced us to just stay in town and have a late brunch with our dear
friends instead.

The sessions for the day included a rousing discussion of low latency Java --
largely in the financial sector with high-frequency trading -- some retro gaming
on the JDK, and a session titled "Java in Space." Came to find out that while
Java is used plenty in mission control software, it is _not_ actually on
satellites. I learned a ton though about low Earth orbit, and the complexities
of making sure that even in the vastness of space things don't run into each
other, a growing problem thanks to Starlink.

After sessions we spent some beach time, bobbing in the Mediterranean waters
which I have missed a ton since moving away from Barcelona. Up at OAC after that
a Cretan evening was scheduled, with folk music, dancers, and traditional food
galore. And yes, even I was coerced into dancing (badly) as the video shows.

{% include youtube.html caption="Dancing _cringe_" shortcode="VCYd7AN4X7I" %}

## JCrete Day 4

The final day of normal sessions started back at the standard morning time.
There was a discussion of JSON libraries, which I found fascinating coming from
other language ecosystems where so much is already in the box compared to Java.
I do hope Java gets an equivalent to `require 'json'; JSON.parse(...)` someday.
There was also some solid discussion of observability -- a topic still dear to
my heart -- and a lightly attended session I proposed about writing technical
books.

{% include image.html caption="Monastery near OAC" url="/images/travel/2025-Crete/crete-monastery.jpg" %}

The evening plan was a full barbecue at the OAC put on by members of the unconf
planning crew. The food was tasty, and the socializing fun, with little to no
threat this time around of dancing.

{% include image.html caption="The JCrete crew" url="/images/travel/2025-Crete/crete-jcrete.jpg" %}

## JCrete Day 5

The last day of the unconference many folks had already left, so typical
sessions were replaced by a morning of hacking. It was a joy to spend that time
across a table from Ben, working first on a proposal for a refreshed version of
one of our books, and then jamming on a retro game ported to Java that he's been
trying to get into working order.

{% include image.html caption="Hacking with friends" url="/images/travel/2025-Crete/crete-hackday.jpg" %}

JCrete was an exceptionally great time. I will admit to being a little leery of
how well the unplanned format would work with a large crowd. I'd done it before
with smaller groups, but never with a multi-session output. It was surprisingly
rich, often insightful, and always fun. Looking forward to attending again in
some future year.

## Around Crete

While our time on the island centered around JCrete, we did get out a bit beyond
driving folks to the airport. After one of the evening events, Amber had looked
up loukoumades, and found a restaurant named
[Kosmas](https://www.kosmastaverna.gr/). We dragged Ben and Anna along for the
twenty minute drive there one evening. It was an interesting change, heading
into the more populated and touristy stretches of Crete closer to Chania. It
highlighted just how quiet and secluded Kolymbari was.

We parked on a busy street, found our way into the restaurant, and cracked open
the menus. To our dismay, while it listed all sorts of desserts, there were no
loukoumades to be found. Mildly panicked, Amber flagged over the waiter and
asked after our favorite Greek treat. Apparently, they're just gifted alongside
a meal rather than being ordered -- actually a common occurrence at many of the
restaurants we visited, although more often it was a flan/custard with citrus
and a shot of raki. Fortunately they were willing to sell us the loukoumades as
long as we ordered the baklava too. Minor sadness I couldn't try because I was
doing an allergy test excluding nuts which I'd shown some sensitivity too (news
flash: didn't help and I missed pastries in Greece and pistachio gelato in Italy
because of it 😭).

{% include image.html caption="Amber vacationing the right way" url="/images/travel/2025-Crete/crete-beach-and-book.jpg" %}

The other favorite activity was just getting down to the beach and resting. The
apartment Ben and Anna had came with loungers and shade on the small strip of
beach in Kolymbari, and the ladies spent a good deal of time there. Ben and I
joined when we could after sessions, bobbing in the water and talking for hours.

{% include image.html caption="Little shrines were common all over the place" url="/images/travel/2025-Crete/crete-shrines.jpg" %}

Back in Athens, Amber had spotted an olive wood cutting board at one of our
meals. This gave us our shopping quest on the island. We trotted back on an
afternoon to the busier part of Chania, looked at a few shops randomly before
doing more Googling and finding a place that specialized in just the sort of
rich, natural wood products Amber was after. We ended up buying another suitcase
to fit that and some gifts that we received from friends. It was worth it
though.

Another very Greek thing that happened during our visit was a music festival
down by the water in Kolymbari. I've called it a quiet sleepy place, but that
only holds most of the time. Many of you will be thinking "Oh, did you go to
it?" but realize that live music is _not_ Amber's jam. She's a wet blanket at
almost any concert to begin with. Once the festival got going -- about eleven
o'clock at night -- it was loud enough to rival the cicadas during the daytime.
I'm pretty sure checking the clock that it ran until at least 3 or 4 in the
morning before finally settling down. Hilariously the next day the apartment
owner contacted us and gifted us twenty euros to buy a bottle of wine. I think
he was aware just how loud it had been so very late at the festival.

We flew back to Athens briefly, then got our next hop on Ryanair to
[Bologna](/travel/2025/08/09/europe-2025-bologna/). Needless to say, that last
leg was delayed, overpacked, and full of angry crowds pushing as if we didn't
all have a seat assigned on the plane. At least it was cheap. You get what you
pay for.

<br />

**What I read along the way**

* _Orbital_ - Samantha Harvey
* _Livesuit_ - James S. A. Corey
* _Brave New World_ - Aldous Huxley
